Synthesis of Anticoagulant Glycopolymers and Lactose-Containing Hydrogels

A dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School of the University of Cincinnati in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Doctor of Philosophy

in the Department of Chemistry of
the College of Arts and Sciences
by

Yongshun Huang

M.S. University of Colorado – Boulder
M.S. University of Science and Technology of China
B.S. Yangzhou University

May 2016

Committee Chair: Neil Ayres, Ph.D.

I

Abstract
This dissertation has two sections: the synthesis and characterization of sulfated polyurea
glycopolymers with anticoagulant activities, and the synthesis of lactose-containing hydrogels
for enzyme stabilization.
The design of the sulfated polyurea glycopolymers is based on the concept to introduce
hydrophilic/thromboresistance functional groups onto the backbones, i.e. polyurea, by
polymerizing sugar-containing diamines with diisocyanates.
Four different sugars, including glucose, mannose, glucosamine and lactose, were selected to
investigate their performance in in intro blood compatibilities (Chapter 2). Glucose and
mannose were chosen because they are monosaccharides with different stereochemistry.
Lactose was used to compare monosaccharide versus disaccharide pendant groups. The
glucosamine unit provided an amino group for N-sulfonation, which has been reported to
enhance anticoagulant activities over O-sulfation. The sulfated polyurea glycopolymers were
obtained using step-growth polymerization techniques between sugar-containing diamines with
hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI), followed with deprotection by MeOH/NaOMe, and
sulfation with a SO3/pyridine complex. The average degree of sulfation was calculated from
elemental analysis and found to be between three and four sulfate groups per saccharide unit.
The blood compatibilities of the sulfated polyurea glycopolymers were measured using platelet
adhesion assay, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), and
thrombin time (TT), exhibiting two highest anticoagulant activities to be mannose and lactose
dimer based glycopolymers. The mechanism of anticoagulant activities was measured by antiIIa and anti-Xa assays with a preference of an anti-IIa pathway rather than an anti-Xa pathway.

II

After screening different sugar monomers, the influence of diisocyante effect and degree of
sulfation on blood compatibilities of sulfated polyurea glycopolymers were studied (Chapter 3).
Sulfated polyurea glycopolymers were synthesized from mannose or lactose dimer based
diamines (M-D or L-D) with different diisocyanates, HDI, toluene 2,4-diisocyanate (TDI),
isophorone diisocyanate (IPDI) and methylene bis(4-cyclohexyl isocyanate) (HMDI). The
influence of degree of sulfation was investigated by synthesizing sulfated polyurea
glycopolymers from HMDI and L-D with sulfur contents ranging from ~3% to 15.4%. The
influence of diisocyanate effect was probed by measuring aPTT, PT and TT of the sulfated
polyurea glycopolymers. Sulf(HMDI-L-D) and sulf(IPDI-M-D) exhibited higher prolongation
of aPTT values than the other diisocyanate-containing sulfated polyurea glycopolymers. aPTT
indicated that higher degrees of sulfation result in prolonged clotting times.
The purpose to synthesize lactose-containing hydrogels was to stabilize papain against higher
temperature denaturation (Chapter 4). Lactose containing monomers, sulfated and nonsulfated
N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamides, were synthesized and polymerized with N-hydroxyethyl
acrylamide to produce hydrogels. 1 wt% of N,N'-methylenebis(acrylamide) and potassium
persulfate was used as a crosslinker and an initiator, respectively. The weight percent of lactosecontaining monomer was increased from 0 to 100 % in increments of 10%. Hydrogels were
successfully produced with up to 90 wt% of N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamide, and 70 wt% of
sulfated N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamide. Gelation was confirmed by inverting the hydrogel vials
and rheology measurements. The rheological measurement of sulfated hydrogels was
responsive to the ionic strengths, but independent to pH values. The nonsulfated hydrogels were
used for papain stabilization against heat burden for pelleting. Papain that was loaded into
hydrogels showed 45% more activity after heating as compared to papain that was heated
III

without hydrogel stabilization. This hydrogel stabilization technique has potential applications
in preserving enzyme activity in animal feed.

IV

V

Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to show my respect to my advisor, Dr. Neil Ayres, for his support and
patience toward my projects in the past four years. I thank him to help me realize my PhD
dream. I enjoyed the free academic atmosphere and the supportive research environment on the
research direction and project selection he provided. The weekly literature discussion expanded
my research scope and his “what and why” questions promoted me to grow faster into a real
polymer scientist rather than a skilled technician. Anyway, without his support, it would unable
for me to realize my PhD dream.
Secondly, I would like to thank my committee members, Dr. David Smithrud and Dr. Peal
Tsang, for their challenging questions on my talks and research projects over the past four years.
This valuable experience benefits me not only during my PhD study but also for my future
career.
I would also like to thank my group members, including the past groups members, Xiaoping
Chen, Leeanne Taylor, Xinjun Yu, Gang Yang, Wenwen Yang, Daniel Cast, Emily G. T.
Westbrook, and Mary R. Warmin, and my current group members, Qinyuan Chai, Brett A.
Bolton, and Mario Perera. Many thanks are devoted to Dr. Xiaoping Chen to bring me into the
polymer chemistry area, and Dr. Leeanne Taylor for her helpful insights with the sugar
chemistry and contributions to my research. I will always miss the happy moments we had
together in this group.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents, Zhengyou Huang and Xiuqin Zhu, for their love,
support and understanding. They gave me enough space to pursue my dream, even under very
hard situations. I deeply love you! I also want to thank my sister, Dandan Huang, and her
VI

husband, Wei Li, to take care of my parents during my PhD journey. This is a very long journey
for me, and finally, I made it, although it is not easy.

VII

Table of Contents
Title: Synthesis of Anticoagulant Glycopolymers and Lactose-Containing Hydrogels
Abstract
Acknowledgements
Table of Contents
Chapter 1. General Introduction
1.1 Biomaterials
1.2 Heparin
1.3 Heparin-mimicking polymers
1.4 Glycosaminoglycan
1.5 Heparin immobilization via electrostatic interactions
1.6 Polyurethane
1.7 Conclusion
1.8 References
Chapter 2. Synthesis and Anticoagulant Activity of Sulfated Glycopolymers with
Different Sugar Pendants
2.1 Abstract
2.2 Introduction
2.3 Results and discussion
2.4 Conclusion
2.5 Experimental section
2.6 References
Chapter 3. Polyurea Glycopolymers with Different Diisocyanate Comonomers:
Synthesis and Anticoagulant Properties
3.1 Abstract
3.2 Introduction
3.3 Results and discussion
3.4 Conclusion
3.5 Experimental section
3.6 References
Chapter 4. Synthesis of Lactose-Containing Hydrogels for Enzyme Stabilization
4.1 Abstract
4.2 Introduction
4.3 Results and discussion
4.4 Conclusion
4.5 Experimental section
4.6 References

VIII

I
II
VI
VIII
1
1
2
11
15
16
18
21
23
33
33
33
38
66
67
121
132
132
132
134
153
153
176
184
184
184
187
210
210
218

Chapter 1. General Introduction

1.1 Biomaterials
Biomaterials are defined as “materials intended to interface with biological systems to
evaluate, treat, augment or replace any tissue, organ, or function of the body”.1 Both
synthetic and naturally occurring materials used in biological systems are referred to as
biomaterials, which are produced and applied in clinical medical devices, such as heart
valves, vascular grafts, stents, artificial organs, catheters, blood pump, filters, tubing, etc.
However, a primary concern is a biomaterial’s blood compatibility when non-native
material comes into contact with blood. The biocompatibility of a biomaterial is “the
ability of a material to perform with an appropriate host response in a specific situation’’,
as defined by David F. Williams.1 The functions of blood include transportation,
regulation of pH and osmosis, maintenance of body temperature, protection against
foreign substances (complement activation) and clot formation from bleeding
(coagulation cascade). The last two functions are especially important due to their direct
correlations with the safety of biomaterials. Inflammation induces complement activation,
while coagulation cascade results in thrombus formation.
When a foreign material contacts with blood, a cascade reaction may be initiated, starting
from protein adsorption, cell-material surface interaction, platelet adhesion and activation
and finally clot formation. There are three pathways for blood coagulation: the intrinsic,
extrinsic and common pathway, as depicted in Figure 1.1.2

1

Figure 1.1. The intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways for blood coagulation
cascades.

As seen from Figure 1.1, the intrinsic pathway is initiated by activating factor XII,
followed by factors XI, IX, and X to reach Xa in the common pathway.3 The extrinsic
pathway is initiated by activating tissue factor VII, followed by the common pathway to
fibrin clot formation.

1.2 Heparin
In order to interfere the unnecessary coagulation process, heparin has been used as a
clinical anticoagulant drug for nearly 100 years.
1.2.1

Structure of heparin

Heparin has a number average molecular weight from 540 kilodalton (kDa) and a low
dispersity (Đ) of 1.11.6 for pharmaceutical use.4 The structure of heparin is shown in
Figure 1.2,5 which has a major repeating unit of trisulfated disaccharide (7595 %), L-

2

IdoA2S-α(14)-D-GlcNS6S, and a minor disulfated disaccharide repeating unit.6
Glucosamine and its derivatives exist as chair conformation irrespective the solvent due
to its equatorial positions of their substituents. However, for iduronate ring, it can adopt
three different conformations, of which two are chair conformations (1C4 and 4C1) and
one is skew-boat conformation (2S0), as drawn in Figure 1.3. NMR and model studies
reveal that both 1C4 and 2S0 have lower conformational stabilities, with 2S0 form to be
slightly favored.7

Figure 1.2. Structure of heparin and its antithrombin pentasaccharide binding site.5

ORE
NREO
HO

O
CO2
4C

1

ORE
OSO3-

-

O 2C

OH
O

-

O2C

-

ONRE

-

OSO 3

1

C4

NREO

H

-

H

O SO3
ORE

O

OH

2S
0

Figure 1.3. The structural conformations of iduronate, where RE and NRE stand for
reducing end and non-reducing end, respectively.

Heparin is widely used as an anticoagulant drug and has the highest negative charge
density among any other drugs.5 The linear polysaccharide backbone of heparin is as
important as the anionic sulfate domains to exhibit the anticoagulant activities.8 However,
the unique character for strong and specific anticoagulant activity of heparin comes from
its the antithrombin pentasaccharide binding site, which has confirmed by structural
3

mutations9 and its total synthesis,10 crystal structural analysis and structure-activity
relationships.9, 11

1.2.2

Anticoagulant activity of heparin

The anticoagulant activity of heparin is attributed to its unique pentasaccharide binding
site,9, 12 which binds antithrombin III (ATIII) to prevent the coagulation process. This
heparin-ATIII binary complex has been identified by the crystal structural analysis and
NMR studies (Figure 1.4).13

Figure 1.4. ATIII and ATIII-heparin pentasaccharide complex.14

The binding interactions between heparin and ATIII include both ionic and nonionic
interactions. The ionic interactions come from the negatively charged sulfate and
carboxylate groups of heparin and the positively charged amino acid residues of ATIII.
The negatively charged groups of the heparin pentasaccharide can be divided into three
different functional sections. The 3-O-sulfate group at position 3 (red color in Figure 1.2)
is in charge of strong and specific binding affinity with ATIII.15 The essential groups to
activate ATIII include: 6-O-sulfate group at position 1, 5-carboxylate group at position 2,

4

2-N-sulfate and 3-O-sulfate groups at position 3, and 2-N-sulfate group at position 5.
Additionally, some other contributing sulfate groups can also increase the biological
activities of heparin, which includes 2-N-sulfate group at position 1, 2-O-sulfate group at
position 4, and 6-O-sulfate group at position 5.9, 11 As for the positively charged amino
acid residues of ATIII, arginine, lysine and a lesser extent of histidine are the main
contributions to the binding energies with heparin via five or six ionic interactions.16 Xray crystal structures have proven the ATIII-pentasaccharide complex of residues Arg 47,
Arg 129, Lys 114, and Lys 125.13 Besides, the first three residues also play an important
role in the conformational change of ATIII upon binding heparin.17 These ionic
interactions are calculated to occupy about 40 % of the ionic binding energies, while
nonionic interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces and hydrophobic
interactions, take the rest 60 % of the overall ionic binding energies.16
The nonionic interactions are presented through the hydrophobic residues of Phe 121 and
Phe 122, which contribute 77 % of the nonionic binding interactions.16, the hydrophobic
benzyl groups of Phe 121 and Phe 122 demonstrate their contributions through indirect
nonionic interactions rather than direct nonionic interactions with heparin. These residues
contact with the basic amino acid residues to re-organize and activate ATIII, which will
bind with pentasaccharide extensively and specifically through strong ionic and nonionic
interactions. When these residues are mutated by either Ala or Leu, a dramatic decrease
in binding affinity is observed, which clearly illustrates the importance of Phe 121 and
Phe 122 in ATIII-pentasaccharide bindings via hydrophobic and van der Waals
interactions.

5

Upon the formation of heparin-ATIII binary complex, the conformation of both heparin
and ATIII will change. For heparin, glucosamine and its derivatives retain their a lowenergy chair conformations, whereas the iduronate rings change its conformations from
skew-boat 2S0 to chair 1C4 conformations.18 The reactive center loop (RCL) of ATIII will
be activated and exposed to further recognize and bind with factor Xa (FXa) and
thrombin, both of which are important blood coagulant factors (Figure 1.1) in coagulant
cascade (Figure 1.5).19

Figure 1.5. Heparin-ATIII-thrombin and heparin-ATIII-FXa ternary complexes20

The activated RCL will attract thrombin to generate a heparin-ATIII-thrombin ternary
complex. Other than the direct interactions between RCL and thrombin, extended
negatively charged polysaccharides from heparin can also interact with positively
charged thrombin non-specifically, making the ternary complex stronger via a bridging
activation mechanism. A detailed molecular simulation model has depicted in Figure
1.6.21

6

Figure 1.6. A molecular simulation model of heparin-ATIII-thrombin ternary complex.21

As can be seen from Figure 1.6, the ATIII-heparin-thrombin ternary complex has both
ATIII binding domain (ABD) and thrombin binding domain (TBD). TBD is formed by
the interactions of the extended polysaccharide units from heparin with thrombin.
Between ABD and TBD, there is a bridge of six to eight monosaccharide units, which has
no interactions with either ATIII or thrombin.22 In order to form both ABD and TBD, the
minimum length of heparin is calculated to be at least 16 saccharides.23 This bridge of six
to eight monosaccharide unit has been used as a strategy for the anticoagulant drug
design, an example is shown in Figure 1.7.

7

Figure 1.7. Two examples of drug design molecules with six to eight monosaccharide
bridging spaces.21

However, different from the heparin-ATIII-thrombin ternary complex, active sites of FXa
only attract the activated RCL to form the heparin-ATIII-FXa ternary complex, without
any direct ionic interactions with heparin. This gives a weak heparin-ATIII-FXa ternary
complex. Actually, once combined with RCL, the heparin-ATIII interactions become
weak, slowly releasing heparin from the ATIII-FXa ternary complex.
As discussed above, the effective binding site of heparin is illustrated as the
pentasaccharide binding site, which binds with ATIII through both ionic and nonionic
interactions to generate a heparin-ATIII binary complex with the change of both
conformations. The activated RCL of ATIII will further generate heparin-ATIII-thrombin
and heparin-ATIII-FXa ternary complexes by binding with thrombin and FXa,
respectively, both of which are very important coagulation factors, resulting in the
anticoagulation effect.

1.2.3

Disadvantages of heparin

Although heparin has been widely used as a clinical anticoagulant, it still has several
limitations, especially for unfractionated heparin (UFH). Current pharmaceutical grade
heparin is extracted and isolated from mucosal tissues of slaughtered animals, such as
porcine intestine, bovine lung, bovine intestine, ovine intestine, etc.5 Extracted heparin
may possess structural heterogeneity, resulting in variable dose-response relationships for
different patients. The extraction from animal mucosal tissues may also introduce risks of

8

pathogen contamination. The worldwide outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy
is a typical example and now only porcine derived heparin is produced in the worldwide
market, which introduces the potential supply shortage of heparin. The global distribution
of contaminated heparin in 2008 highlighted these concerns and resulted in more than
100 deaths. The contaminant is identified as over sulfated chondroitin sulfate.5, 12, 21
Furthermore, a prolonged treatment with heparin may result in adverse side effects such
as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), which is caused by the formation of an
antibody against the heparin-platelet factor 4 complex.24

1.2.4

(Ultra)low molecular weight heparin

The drawbacks of heparin resulted in the development of alternative forms of heparin,
namely low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) and ultralow molecular weight heparin
(ULMWH). LMWH has an average molecular weight of 6.0 kDa and is produced from
unfractionated heparin by chemical or enzymatic degradation, including chemical
deamination, chemical or enzymatic β–elimination and oxidative cleavage through
radicals.25 The commercially available LMWHs are collected in Table 1.1 and the
schematic depolymerization methods are shown in Figure 1.8.

Table 1.1. Commercially available LMWHs.26
LMWH

Trade Name

Manufacturer

Preparation Method

Ardeparin

Normiflo

Wyeth-Ayerst

Oxidative depolymerization with H2O2

Certoparin

Sandoparin

Novartis

Deaminative cleavage with isoamyl nitrite

Delteparin

Fragmin

Pfizer Inc.

Deaminative cleavage with nitrous acid

Enoxaparin

Lovenox

Sanofi Aventis

β–Elimination Cleavage of the benzyl ester of

9

Clexane

heparin by alkaline treatment

Nadroparin

Fraxiparin

GlaxoSmithKline

Deaminative cleavage with nitrous acid

Parnaparin

Fluxum

Alfa Wassermann

Oxidative depolymerization with Cu+ and H2O2

Reviparin

Clivarin

Knoll

Deaminative cleavage with nitrous acid

Tinzaparin

Innohep

Leo Pharma

β–Elimination Cleavage by heparinase

Figure 1.8. Depolymerization methods to prepare LMWHs.27

Different from LMWHs, ULMWH (Trade name: Arixtra) is a synthesized drug with a
chemical structure of the unique pentasaccharide unit and a molecular weight of 1508
Da.12, 28 Compared to UFH, LMWH and ULMWH exhibit more predictable anticoagulant
doses, longer half-lives, and reduced risks of side effects.29 However, structural
heterogeneity and potential pathogen contamination still exist for LMWHs due to their
origination from unfractionated heparin, derived from animals. As for ULMWH, more
than 50 steps are required for the total synthesis of ULMWH with an overall yield of only

10

0.1 %.30 Although improved synthetic methods have been proposed,28b, 31 Arixtra is still
the most expensive drug among the heparins. LMWHs and ULMWH also exhibit limited
inhibition efficiency toward thrombin due to the shorter molecular lengths that do not
have direct interactions between LMWHs or ULMWH with thrombin. These
disadvantages call for heparin-mimicking polymers.

1.3 Heparin-mimicking polymers
A close examination toward heparin, LMWHs and ULMWH reveals that the
anticoagulation activity comes from three characters as linear, anionic, and
polysaccharide. Based on this analysis, the synthesis of heparin-mimicking polymers can
be divided into three catalogues: mimicking anionic domains, polymerization of sulfated
saccharide units or sulfation of glycopolymers, and sulfation of natural occurring
polysaccharides.

1.3.1

Mimicking anionic domains

Poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) is the most commonly used polymer to replicate
the anionic sulfate domains of heparin.32 For example, the Varghese group reported the
binding of PSS with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) proteins.32a Biological tests
suggested that PSS can promote myogenic differentiation of muscle progenitor cells as
heparin does. Maynard’s group synthesized a heparin-mimicking copolymer,
poly(sodium

4-styrenesulfonate-co-poly(ethylene

glycol)

methacrylate)

(pSS-co-

pPEGMA) by RAFT polymerization (Figure 1.9).32e The dithioester group was reduced
to a thiol and immobilized on gold coated surface plasmon resonance (SPR) chip to

11

investigate the electrostatic interactions of pSS-co-pPEGMA with vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) or bFGF. A slightly modified copolymer, pSS-co-pPEGMA, was
reported by the same group and covalently binded with bFGF.32b In this copolymer, a
pyridine disulfide functional group was used to react with the free thiol group of bFGF
with Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline (D-PBS) and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid
(EDTA). The obtained conjugate was confirmed by SDS-PAGE, native-PAGE,
electrospray ionization gas-phase electrophoretic mobility molecular analysis (ESIGEMMA). Biological assays confirmed its non-toxicity, stability and strong inhibit
ability.

Figure 1.9. The immobilization of pSS-co-pPEGMA on gold coated SPR chips (a to b)
and the electrostatic interactions between pSS-co-pPEGMA and VEGF (c) or bFGF
(d).32e
12

1.3.2

Mimicking sulfated saccharides

Akashi’s group synthesized poly(glucosyloxyethyl methacylate) (poly(GEMA)), using an
unprotected glucoside via a free radical polymerization, initiated by ammonium
peroxodisulfate (APS) in aqueous solution.33 This polymer was then sulfated by a
DMF/SO3 complex to obtain poly(GEMA) sulfate. The degree of sulfonation could be
controlled by the reaction time.33 This polymer can extend blood clotting time. Grainger’s
group published the synthesis of a polymer brush from a modified silicon surface by atom
transfer radical polymerization method.34 Diisopropylidene groups were used to protect
glucose for polymerization, which was then deprotected and sulfated to obtain the
heparin-mimicking polymer. Saccharides can also be sulfated first to produce sulfated
saccharides for direct polymerization. Chaikof’s group published heparin-mimicking
polymers via a cyanoxyl-mediated free-radical polymerization method from sulfated
glucose, glucosamine and lactose.35 Both homopolymers and copolymers can be obtained
with this radical polymerization technique. The heparin-mimicking polymers exhibited
prolonged thrombin time (TT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).
Recently, Hsieh-Wilson’s group synthesized a sulfated disaccharide monomer by
mimicking iduronic acid and glucosamine from the unique petasaccharide unit (Figure
1.10).36 After ring-opening metathesis polymerization and reduction, the heparinmimicking polymers were obtained. These polymers exhibited comparable anticoagulant
activities at a concentration of 150 g/mL to heparin, LMWH and ULMWH.

13

Figure 1.10. The proposed interactions between the synthesized heparin-mimicking
polymers and FIIa, ATIII and FXa.36a

Our group also published a nonionic glycosaminoglycan polymer mimetic based on a
methacryloyl backbone using RAFT polymerization,37 and heparin-mimicking polymers
with glucose, mannose, glucosamine, and lactose as pendant groups, which will be
discussed in Chapters 2 and 3.38

1.3.3

Mimicking polymers from natural occurring polysaccharides

Sulfation of natural occurring polysaccharides was also used to produce heparinmimicking polymers with anticoagulant activities. The Uryu group reported their
synthesis of dextran-type heparinoids by ring-opening polymerization of anhydro sugar
derivatives.39 Sulfonation of the polymer was carried out with the aid of chlorosulfuric
acid and the improved anticoagulant properties were attributed to the sulfamide groups in
these polymers. Baumann et al published a detailed sulfonation method for the
incorporation of O-sulfo, N-sulfo, N-acetyl, and N-carboxymethyl groups in chitosan
derivatives.40 Vongchan group reported the deacetylation of chitin to chitosan, followed

14

by sulfonation in chlorosulfuric acid and DMF.41 The degree of sulfonation was
calculated to be 2.13 as analyzed by elemental analysis. H2S, H3S and H6S were
confirmed by 1H NMR. In other reported methods, a low molecular weight sulfated
chitosan was prepared by Varlamov group.42 SO3 in sulfuric acid was used to introduce
sulfate moieties to obtain heparin-mimicking polymers. The percentage of sulfonation
was found to be 90-95 % at C6, and 15-25 % at the amino group. High and low sulfated
chitosan can be obtained by using different sulfation reagent, as reported by Fasl group,
where SO3/pyridine gave high sulfated chitosan and low sulfated chitosan can be
generated with chlorosulfuric acid.43 The highly sulfated chitosan exhibited a comparable
anticoagulant potency to heparin and dextran sulfate.

1.4 Glycosaminoglycan
Heparin belongs to the class of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs are natural occurring
linear anionic polysaccharides consisting of a repeating disaccharide unit with negative
charges from the deprotected carboxylate and sulfate functional groups at physiological
pH values.20 GAGs can be classified into two groups: non-sulfated GAGs (hyaluronic
acid) and sulfated GAGs (chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, karatan sulfate, heparin
and heparan sulfate). The repeating units of GAGs are normally composed of an uronic
acid (D-glucoronic acid or L-iduronic acid) and an amino sugar (D-galactosamine or Dglucosamine) (Table 1.2). Depending on the type of amino sugar unit, chondroitin sulfate
and dermatan sulfate are referred as galactosaminoglycans (containing galactosamine),
whereas heparin and heparan sulfate are called glucosaminoglycans (containing
glucosamine).

15

Table 1.2. Repeating disaccharide units of different GAGs.20
GAGs

Disaccharide Unit

Features
MW: 4–8000 kDa;
Usually found in synovial fluid, vitreous humor,
etc;
Excellent lubricators and shock absorbers.

Hyaluronic Acid

MW: 5–50 kDa;
Most abundant GAG in the body;
Found in cartilage, tendon, ligament, and aorta;
Bind to proteins to form proteoglycan aggregates.

Chondroitin Sulfate

Dermatan Sulfate

MW: 15–40 kDa;
Found in skin, blood vessels, and heart valves.
MW: 4–19 kDa;
Most heterogeneous GAG;
Found in the cornea and aggregated with
chondroitin sulfate.

Karatan Sulfate

Heparan Sulfate

MW: 10–70 kDa;
Extracellular component found in the basement
membrane and as a ubiquitous component of cell
surfaces.

(Major)

MW: 5–40 kDa;
Intracellular component of mast cells, especially
in the liver, lungs and skin.

Heparin (Major)

Heparin/Heparan
N.A.

Sulfate (Minor)

1.5 Heparin immobilization via electrostatic interactions
Although heparin has been used as an effective anticoagulant, its immobilization on
blood contacting medical devices is still a great challenge. Currently, two strategies are
used to immobilize heparin on blood contacting devices: electrostatic interactions and
covalent bonding.
16

As a negatively charged polysaccharide, heparin can be immobilized by ionic interactions
with a cationic polymer, which includes the direct deposition on a polymer or the
construction of a layer-by-layer complex. Li’s group reported a fabrication of a
multilayer film with aminolyzed poly(ethylene terephthalate), chitosan and heparin.44
This multilayer film was proven to reduce bacterial adhesion and to kill bacteria, as well
as strong anticoagulation activities. Later, they constructed a new multilayer film, by
replacing chitosan with chitosan-silver nitrate complex, followed by reduction of silver
nitrate to silver nanoparticles with the aid of ascorbic acid.45 The size of silver
nanoparticles can be controlled by both the concentration of chitosan-silver nitrate
solution and pH of ascorbic acid; chitosan can kill bacteria as well as silver nanoparticles.
Barbucci’s group46 reported the ionic interactions to immobilize heparin on a cationic
poly(amido-amine)-immobilized polyurethane (PUPA) surface. This quantity of heparin
immobilized was measured by radiolabelled heparin. The stability of this heparin/PUPA
complex was tested in saline solution and NaOH solution, of which heparin released
about 43 % in saline and 25 % in NaOH solution. Biological assays revealed their
excellent non-thrombogenic properties.
Compared with the electrostatic immobilization techniques, covalent bonding of heparin
with other polymers is relative difficult and time-consuming, but gives robust and stable
binary complexes. The carboxylate groups from heparin can react with other functional
groups, such as amino groups to amides, carboxylate groups to anhydrides. For examples,
Yang’s group47 synthesized a new polyurethane, containing free carboxylate groups, by
reacting

of

polycarbonate

diol,

methylene

diphenyl

diisocyanate

and

2,2-

bis(hydroxymethyl) propionic acid in a 1:2:1 ratio. This free carboxylic acid group was

17

activated

by

1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide

(EDC)

and

N-

hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) to react with heparin, forming anhydride functional groups.
Lee’s group48 immobilized heparin by reaction with dopamine with the aid of EDC and
NHS, followed by deposition on the surface of polyurethane to improve its blood
compatibilities. Ng’s group reported two modified silicon surfaces that were used to react
with heparin.49 One was modified by (3-aminopropyl) trimethoxysilane to give free
amino group, which coupled with heparin catalyzed by water-soluble carbodiimide. In
the other case, silica surface was coated with octadecyltrichlorosilane, while heparin was
firstly reacted with para-azidoaniline, the combination reaction was initiated by a UV
lamp. Modified TiO2 surface was also used to immobilize heparin.50 TiO2 was coated
with pulsed plasma polymeric allylamine (P-PPAa) to introduce free amino groups,
which covalently immobilized heparin with EDC and NHS. The stability of this complex
was detected by the surface concentration of heparin after incubation in water for 30 days.

1.6 Polyurethane
The demand for blood compatible biomaterials is increasing every year. Currently, 52 %
biomaterials come from synthetic polymers, natural polymers occupy about 22 %, 16 %
are metals, and 10 % are ceramics.51 Many effects have devoted to the design and
synthesis of blood compatible polymers. Moderate to good results have been obtained by
either synthetic biomaterials or surface-coating of naturally occurring biomaterials.
Polyurethane is one the most widely used biomaterials as clinical medical devices, such
as catheters, blood filters, and blood tubing due to its excellent mechanical properties
including strength, moldability, and elasticity.52 Polyurethane is commonly synthesized

18

via step-growth polymerization by reacting a diol and a diisocyanate to form carbamate
(urethane) functional groups (Figure 1.11). Polyethylene glycols or polyethylene oxides
often serve as diols. Diisocyanates include hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI), 2,4toluene diisocyante (TDI), diphenylmethane diisocyanate, and so on. In some cases, a
Lewis acid, dibutyltin dilaurate (DBTDL), or a tertiary base, such as trimethylamine
(TEA), 1,8-diazabicycloundec-7-ene (DBU), 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane (DABCO),
etc, is used as a catalyst to activate and promote the polymerization.53

Figure 1.11. A typical synthetic route to polyurethane.

Currently, commercial brands of clinically used polyurethane materials include Biomer
(Johnson & Johnson), Mitrathane (PolyMedica Industries, Inc.), and Pellethane and
Tecoflex (The Lubrizol Corporation).54 However, due to their inherent hydrophobicity,
typical polyurethanes exhibit poor blood compatibility by activating platelets to form
thrombi.55 One strategy to improve blood compatibility of polyurethanes is to increase
surface hydrophilicity by incorporating other hydrophilic functional groups such as
sulfates, carboxylates, and phosphonates. For example, propyl sulfate groups were
incorporated into the hard segments of a poly(tetramethylene oxide)-based polyurethane.
The sulfonated polymer was observed to promote decreased platelet deposition with a

19

delayed thrombin time (TT), raptilase time, prothrombin time (PT), and activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT).56 In another example, a sulfonated polyurea-urethane was
prepared using a diamino disulfonic acid.57 Improved anticoagulant activity was observed
as evidenced by a prolonged TT. Polyurethanes have been synthesized with the naturally
occurring biopolymer dermatan sulfate and hyaluronic acid to increase material
hydrophilicity (Figure 1.12).58 Decreased protein adsorption and cell adhesion were
observed, which were attributed to the physical and biological properties of the dermatan
sulfate and the increased surface hydrophilicity and surface energy of the hyaluronic acid.
Carboxylate groups can also be incorporated into polyurethane, but with lower
anticoagulating capacities in platelet deposition assays compared to sulfonated
polyurethanes.59

20

Figure 1.12. Reaction scheme for the synthesis of polyurethane and polyurethanedermatan sulfate copolymers.58b

1.7 Conclusion
The primary concern for the application of a biomaterial is its blood compatibilities. Once
contacted with a foreign material, a cascade reaction may be initiated and resulted in clot
formation. Surface heparinization is commonly used method to improve the surface
21

anticoagulant properties and to prevent blood clotting, due to the excellent anticoagulant
properties of heparin and its widely application as an anticoagulant for over 80 years.
This introduction presented the structure of heparin, the anticoagulant mechanism of
heparin, its applications for surface heparinization and the limitations of heparin.
Alternative heparin analogues/derivatives, such as LMWHs and ULMWH, were also
introduced. Based on the structure of heparin, three strategies were presented for the
synthesis

of

heparin-mimicking

polymers,

i.e.

mimicking

anionic

domains,

polymerization of sulfated saccharides and the sulfation of natural occurring
polysaccharides.

22

1.8 References
1.

Williams, D. F., The Williams dictionary of biomaterials. Liverpool University

Press: 1999.
2.

Osterud, B., Activation pathways of the coagulation system in normal

haemostasis. Scand. J. Haematol. 1984, 32 (4), 337-345.
3.

Long, A. T.; Kenne, E.; Jung, R.; Fuchs, T. A.; Renné, T., Contact system

revisited: an interface between inflammation, coagulation, and innate immunity. Journal
of Thrombosis and Haemostasis 2016, 14 (3), 427-437.
4.

Ahsan, A.; Jeske, W.; Hoppensteadt, D.; Lormeau, J. C.; Wolf, H.; Fareed, J.,

Molecular Profiling and Weight Determination of Heparins and Depolymerized Heparins.
J. Pharm. Sci. 1995, 84 (6), 724-727.
5.

Liu, H.; Zhang, Z.; Linhardt, R. J., Lessons learned from the contamination of

heparin. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2009, 26 (3), 313-321.
6.

(a) Casu, B.; Naggi, A.; Torri, G., Re-visiting the structure of heparin. Carbohydr.

Res. 2015, 403, 60-68; (b) Rabenstein, D. L., Heparin and heparan sulfate: structure and
function. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2002, 19 (3), 312-331.
7.

Mulloy, B.; Forster, M. J.; Jones, C.; Davies, D. B., Nmr and Molecular-Modeling

Studies of the Solution Conformation of Heparin. Biochem. J. 1993, 293, 849-858.
8.

Heuck, C. C.; Schiele, U.; Horn, D.; Fronda, D.; Ritz, E., The Role of Surface-

Charge on the Accelerating Action of Heparin on the Antithrombin Iii Inhibited Activity
of Alpha-Thrombin. J. Biol. Chem. 1985, 260 (8), 4598-4603.

23

9.

van Boeckel, C. A. A.; Petitou, M., The Unique Antithrombin III Binding Domain

of Heparin: A Lead to New Synthetic Antithrombotics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1993,
32 (12), 1671-1690.
10.

(a) Petitou, M.; Duchaussoy, P.; Lederman, I.; Choay, J.; Sinay, P.; Jacquinet, J.

C.; Torri, G., Synthesis of Heparin Fragments - A Chemical Synthesis of the
Pentasaccharide O-(2-deoxy-2-sulfamido-6-O-sulfo-alpha-deuterium-glucopyranosyl)-(14)- O-(beta-deuterium-glucopyranosyluronic acid)-(1- 4)-O-(2-deoxy-2-sulfamido-3,6-diO-sulfo-alpha-deuterium-gluco
idopyranosyluronic

acid)-(1-

pyranosyl)-(1-

4)-O-(2-O-sulfo-alpha-L-

4)-2-deoxy-2-sulfamido-6-O-sulfo-deuterium-

glycopyranose decasodium salt, A Heparin Fragment Having High-affinity for
Antithrombin-IIIA. Carbohydr. Res. 1986, 147 (2), 221-236; (b) Sinay, P.; Jacquinet, J.
C.; Petitou, M.; Duchaussoy, P.; Lederman, I.; Choay, J.; Torri, G., Total Synthesis of a
Heparin

Pentasaccharide

Fragment

Having

High-affinity

for

Antithrombin-III.

Carbohydr. Res. 1984, 132 (2), C5-C9.
11.

Petitou, M.; van Boeckel, C. A. A., A synthetic antithrombin III binding

pentasaccharide is now a drug! What comes next? Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2004, 43 (24),
3118-3133.
12.

Petitou, M.; van Boeckel, C. A. A., A synthetic antithrombin III binding

pentasaccharide is now a drug! What comes next? Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2004, 43 (24),
3118-3133.
13.

Jin, L.; Abrahams, J. P.; Skinner, R.; Petitou, M.; Pike, R. N.; Carrell, R. W., The

anticoagulant activation of antithrombin by heparin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1997,
94 (26), 14683-14688.

24

14.

Langdown, J.; Johnson, D. J. D.; Baglin, T. P.; Huntington, J. A., Allosteric

Activation of Antithrombin Critically Depends upon Hinge Region Extension. J. Biol.
Chem. 2004, 279 (45), 47288-47297.
15.

Atha, D. H.; Lormeau, J. C.; Petitou, M.; Rosenberg, R. D.; Choay, J.,

Contribution of Monosaccharide Residues in Heparin Binding to Antithrombin III.
Biochemistry 1985, 24 (23), 6723-6729.
16.

Jairajpuri, M. A.; Lu, A. Q.; Desai, U.; Olson, S. T.; Bjork, I.; Bock, S. C.,

Antithrombin III phenylalanines 122 and 121 contribute to its high affinity for heparin
and its conformational activation. J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278 (18), 15941-15950.
17.

Arocas, V.; Bock, S. C.; Raja, S.; Olson, S. T.; Bjork, I., Lysine 114 of

antithrombin is of crucial importance for the affinity and kinetics of heparin
pentasaccharide binding. J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276 (47), 43809-43817.
18.

Guerrini, M.; Guglieri, S.; Beccati, D.; Torri, G.; Viskov, C.; Mourier, P.,

Conformational transitions induced in heparin octasaccharides by binding with
antithrombin III. Biochem. J. 2006, 399, 191-198.
19.

Olson, S. T.; Chuang, Y. J., Heparin activates antithrombin anticoagulant function

by generating new interaction sites (exosites) for blood clotting proteinases. Trends
Cardiovasc. Med. 2002, 12 (8), 331-338.
20.

Gandhi, N. S.; Mancera, R. L., The Structure of Glycosaminoglycans and their

Interactions with Proteins. Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 2008, 72 (6), 455-482.
21.

de Kort, M.; Buijsman, R. C.; van Boeckel, C. A. A., Synthetic heparin

derivatives as new anticoagulant drugs. Drug Discovery Today 2005, 10 (11), 769-779.

25

22.

Grootenhuis, P.; Westerduin, P.; Meuleman, D.; Petitou, M.; van Boeckel, C.,

Rational design of synthetic heparin analogues with tailor-made coagulation factor
inhibitory activity. Nat. Struct. Biol. 1995, 2 (9), 736-739.
23.

Petitou, M.; Duchaussoy, P.; Driguez, P. A.; Jaurand, G.; Herault, J. P.; Lormeau,

J. C.; van Boeckel, C. A. A.; Herbert, J. M., First synthetic carbohydrates with the full
anticoagulant properties of heparin. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 1998, 37 (21), 3009-3014.
24.

Warkentin,

T.

E.;

Chong,

B.

H.;

Greinacher,

A.,

Heparin-induced

thrombocytopenia: Towards consensus. Thromb. Haemostasis 1998, 79 (1), 1-7.
25.

Hirsh, J.; Levine, M., Low molecular weight heparin. Blood 1992, 79 (1), 1-17.

26.

Linhardt, R. J.; Gunay, N. S. In Production and chemical processing of low

molecular weight heparins, Seminars in thrombosis and hemostasis, New York: Stratton
Intercontinental Medical Book Corporation, c1974-: 1999; pp 5-16.
27.

Cai, C.; Li, L. Y.; Harvey, C.; Liu, J.; Linhardt, R. J., Toward the

chemoenzymatic synthesis of heparan sulfate oligosaccharides: oxidative cleavage of pnitrophenyl group with ceric ammonium salts. Tetrahedron Lett. 2013, 54 (33), 44714474.
28.

(a) Petitou, M.; Hérault, J.-P.; Bernat, A.; Driguez, P.-A.; Duchaussoy, P.;

Lormeau, J.-C.; Herbert, J.-M., Synthesis of thrombin-inhibiting heparin mimetics
without side effects. Nature 1999, 398 (6726), 417-422; (b) Xu, Y. M.; Masuko, S.;
Takieddin, M.; Xu, H. M.; Liu, R. P.; Jing, J.; Mousa, S. A.; Linhardt, R. J.; Liu, J.,
Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of Homogeneous Ultralow Molecular Weight Heparins.
Science 2011, 334 (6055), 498-501.

26

29.

(a) Warkentin, T. E.; Levine, M. N.; Hirsh, J.; Horsewood, P.; Roberts, R. S.;

Gent, M.; Kelton, J. G., Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia in Patients Treated with
Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin or Unfractionated Heparin. N. Engl. J. Med. 1995, 332
(20), 1330-1336; (b) Weitz, J. I.; Linkins, L.-A., Beyond heparin and warfarin: the new
generation of anticoagulants. Expert Opin. Invest. Drugs 2007, 16 (3), 271-282.
30.

Petitou, M.; Jacquinet, J.-C.; Sinay, P.; Choay, J.; Lormeau, J.-C.; Nassr, M.

Process for the organic synthesis of oligosaccharides and derivatives thereof. US4818816
A, 1989.
31.

Seifert, J.; Singh, L.; Ramsdale, T. E.; West, M. L.; Drinnan, N. B. Synthetic

heparin pentasaccharides. EP1440077 B1, 2009.
32.

(a) Sangaj, N.; Kyriakakis, P.; Yang, D.; Chang, C. W.; Arya, G.; Varghese, S.,

Heparin Mimicking Polymer Promotes Myogenic Differentiation of Muscle Progenitor
Cells. Biomacromolecules 2010, 11 (12), 3294-3300; (b) Nguyen, T. H.; Kim, S.-H.;
Decker, C. G.; Wong, D. Y.; Loo, J. A.; Maynard, H. D., A heparin-mimicking polymer
conjugate stabilizes basic fibroblast growth factor. Nat. Chem. 2013, 5 (3), 221-227; (c)
Matsumoto, N. M.; Prabhakaran, P.; Rome, L. H.; Maynard, H. D., Smart Vaults:
Thermally-Responsive Protein Nanocapsules. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (1), 867-874; (d)
Vázquez-Dorbatt, V.; Lee, J.; Lin, E.-W.; Maynard, H. D., Synthesis of Glycopolymers
by

Controlled

Radical

Polymerization

Techniques

and

Their

Applications.

ChemBioChem 2012, 13 (17), 2478-2487; (e) Christman, K. L.; Vazquez-Dorbatt, V.;
Schopf, E.; Kolodziej, C. M.; Li, R. C.; Broyer, R. M.; Chen, Y.; Maynard, H. D.,
Nanoscale Growth Factor Patterns by Immobilization on a Heparin-Mimicking Polymer.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (49), 16585-16591.

27

33.

Akashi, M.; Sakamoto, N.; Suzuki, K.; Kishida, A., Synthesis and anticoagulant

activity of sulfated glucoside-bearing polymer. Bioconjugate Chem. 1996, 7 (4), 393-395.
34.

Ayres, N.; Holt, D. J.; Jones, C. F.; Corum, L. E.; Grainger, D. W., Polymer

Brushes Containing Sulfonated Sugar Repeat Units: Synthesis, Charaderization, and In
Vitro Testing of Blood Coagulation Activation. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem.
2008, 46 (23), 7713-7724.
35.

(a) Baskaran, S.; Grande, D.; Sun, X. L.; Yayon, A.; Chaikof, E. L.,

Glycosaminoglycan-mimetic biomaterials. 3. Glycopolymers prepared from alkenederivatized mono- and disaccharide-based glycomonomers. Bioconjugate Chem. 2002, 13
(6), 1309-1313; (b) Grande, D.; Baskaran, S.; Baskaran, C.; Gnanou, Y.; Chaikof, E. L.,
Glycosaminoglycan-mimetic biomaterials. 1. Nonsulfated and sulfated glycopolymers by
cyanoxyl-mediated free-radical polymerization. Macromolecules 2000, 33 (4), 1123-1125;
(c) Grande, D.; Baskaran, S.; Chaikof, E. L., Glycosaminoglycan mimetic biomaterials. 2.
Alkene- and acrylate-derivatized glycopolymers via cyanoxyl-mediated free-radical
polymerization. Macromolecules 2001, 34 (6), 1640-1646; (d) Sun, X.-L.; Grande, D.;
Baskaran, S.; Hanson, S. R.; Chaikof, E. L., Glycosaminoglycan Mimetic Biomaterials. 4.
Synthesis of Sulfated Lactose-Based Glycopolymers That Exhibit Anticoagulant Activity.
Biomacromolecules 2002, 3 (5), 1065-1070.
36.

(a) Oh, Y. I.; Sheng, G. J.; Chang, S.-K.; Hsieh-Wilson, L. C., Tailored

Glycopolymers as Anticoagulant Heparin Mimetics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52 (45),
11796-11799; (b) Sheng, G. J.; Oh, Y. I.; Chang, S.-K.; Hsieh-Wilson, L. C., Tunable
Heparan Sulfate Mimetics for Modulating Chemokine Activity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013,
135 (30), 10898-10901.

28

37.

Taylor, L.; Chen, X.; Ayres, N., Synthesis of a glycosaminoglycan polymer

mimetic using an N-alkyl-N,N-linked urea oligomer containing glucose pendant groups.
Polym. Int. 2014, 63 (1), 127-135.
38.

(a) Huang, Y.; Taylor, L.; Chen, X.; Ayres, N., Synthesis of a polyurea from a

glucose- or mannose-containing N-alkyl urea peptoid oligomer. J. Polym. Sci., Part A:
Polym. Chem. 2013, 51 (24), 5230-5238; (b) Huang, Y.; Shaw, M. A.; Mullins, E. S.;
Kirley, T. L.; Ayres, N., Synthesis and Anticoagulant Activity of Polyureas Containing
Sulfated Carbohydrates. Biomacromolecules 2014, 15 (12), 4455-4466.
39.

Hatanaka, K.; Yoshida, T.; Miyahara, S.; Sato, T.; Ono, F.; Uryu, T.; Kuzuhara,

H., Synthesis of new heparinoids with high anticoagulant activity. J. Med. Chem. 1987,
30 (5), 810-814.
40.

Baumann, H.; Faust, V., Concepts for improved regioselective placement of O-

sulfo, N-sulfo, N-acetyl, and N-carboxymethyl groups in chitosan derivatives. Carbohydr.
Res. 2001, 331 (1), 43-57.
41.

Vongchan, P.; Sajomsang, W.; Subyen, D.; Kongtawelert, P., Anticoagulant

activity of a sulfated chitosan. Carbohydr. Res. 2002, 337 (13), 1239-1242.
42.

Vikhoreva, G.; Bannikova, G.; Stolbushkina, P.; Panov, A.; Drozd, N.; Makarov,

V.; Varlamov, V.; Gal'braikh, L., Preparation and anticoagulant activity of a lowmolecular-weight sulfated chitosan. Carbohydr. Polym. 2005, 62 (4), 327-332.
43.

Fasl, H.; Stana, J.; Stropnik, D.; Strnad, S.; Stana-Kleinschek, K.; Ribitsch, V.,

Improvement of the Hemocompatibility of PET Surfaces Using Different Sulphated
Polysaccharides as Coating Materials. Biomacromolecules 2010, 11 (2), 377-381.

29

44.

Fu, J.; Ji, J.; Yuan, W.; Shen, J., Construction of anti-adhesive and antibacterial

multilayer films via layer-by-layer assembly of heparin and chitosan. Biomaterials 2005,
26 (33), 6684-6692.
45.

Fu, J.; Ji, J.; Fan, D.; Shen, J., Construction of antibacterial multilayer films

containing nanosilver via layer-by-layer assembly of heparin and chitosan-silver ions
complex. J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 2006, 79A (3), 665-674.
46.

(a) Albanese, A.; Barbucci, R.; Belleville, J.; Bowry, S.; Eloy, R.; Lemke, H. D.;

Sabatini, L., In-Vitro Biocompatibility Evaluation of a Heparinizable Material (PUPA),
Based on Polyurethane and Poly(Amido-Amine) Components. Biomaterials 1994, 15 (2),
129-136; (b) Barbucci, R.; Magnani, A., Conformation of Human Plasma-Proteins at
Polymer Surfaces - the Effectiveness of Surface Heparinization. Biomaterials 1994, 15
(12), 955-962.
47.

Lu, Y.; Shen, L.; Gong, F. R.; Cui, J. Y.; Rao, J.; Chen, J. D.; Yang, W.,

Polycarbonate urethane films modified by heparin to enhance hemocompatibility and
endothelialization. Polym. Int. 2012, 61 (9), 1433-1438.
48.

You, I.; Kang, S. M.; Byun, Y.; Lee, H., Enhancement of blood compatibility of

poly(urethane) substrates by mussel-inspired adhesive heparin coating. Bioconjugate
Chem. 2011, 22 (7), 1264-1269.
49.

Wang, A. F.; Cao, T.; Tang, H. Y.; Liang, X. M.; Salley, S. O.; Ng, K. Y. S., In

vitro haemocompatibility and stability of two types of heparin-immobilized silicon
surfaces. Colloids Surf., B 2005, 43 (3-4), 245-255.
50.

Yang, Z. L.; Wang, J.; Luo, R. F.; Li, X.; Chen, S.; Sun, H.; Huang, N., Improved

Hemocompatibility Guided by Pulsed Plasma Tailoring the Surface Amino

30

Functionalities of TiO2 Coating for Covalent Immobilization of Heparin. Plasma
Processes Polym. 2011, 8 (9), 850-858.
51.

Group, F., Biocompatible Materials: US Industry Study with Forecasts to 2010 &

2015. The Freedonia Group, Cleveland, OH: 2006; p 264.
52.

Kajiyama, T.; Takahara, A., Surface properties and platelet reactivity of

segmented poly(etherurethanes) and poly(etherurethaneureas). J. Biomater. Appl. 1991, 6
(1), 42-71.
53.

(a) Abdelrehim, M.; Komber, H.; Langenwalter, J.; Voit, B.; Bruchmann, B.,

Synthesis and characterization of hyperbranched poly(urea-urethane)s based on AA* and
B2B* monomers. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 2004, 42 (12), 3062-3081; (b)
Kebir, N.; Morandi, G.; Campistron, L.; Laguerre, A.; Pilard, J. F., Synthesis of well
defined amino telechelic cis-1,4-oligoisoprenes from carbonyl telechelic oligomers; first
studies of their potentialities as polyurethane or polyurea materials precursors. Polymer
2005, 46 (18), 6844-6854.
54.

(a) Brandwood, A.; Gunatillake, P.; Meijs, G. F.; Rizzardo, E.; Schindhelm, K. H.

Polyurethane or polyurethane-urea elastomeric compositions. US5393858 A, 1995; (b)
Gilding, D.; Reed, A.; Askill, I.; Briana, S., Mitrathane (R) A New Polyether Urethane
Urea for Critical Medical Applications. ASAIO J. 1984, 30 (1), 571-576; (c) Gogolewski,
S., Selected topics in biomedical polyurethanes. A review. Colloid. Polym. Sci. 1989, 267
(9), 757-785; (d) McMillin, C. R., Elastomers for biomedical applications. Rubber Chem.
Technol. 1994, 67 (3), 417-446.

31

55.

Yeganeh, H.; Orang, F.; Solouk, A.; Rafienia, M., Synthesis, characterization and

preliminary investigation of blood compatibility of novel epoxy-modified polyurethane
networks. J. Bioact. Compat. Polym. 2008, 23 (3), 276-300.
56.

(a) Grasel, T. G.; Cooper, S. L., Properties and biological inteactions of

polyurethane anionomers: Effect of sulfonate incorporation. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1989,
23 (3), 311-338; (b) Silver, J. H.; Hart, A. P.; Williams, E. C.; Cooper, S. L.; Charef, S.;
Labarre, D.; Jozefowicz, M., Anticoagulant effects of sulphonated polyurethanes.
Biomaterials 1992, 13 (6), 339-344.
57.

Santerre, J.; Ten Hove, P.; VanderKamp, N.; Brash, J., Effect of sulfonation of

segmented polyurethanes on the transient adsorption of fibrinogen from plasma: possible
correlation with anticoagulant behavior. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1992, 26 (1), 39-57.
58.

(a) Xu, F.; Flanagan, C. E.; Ruiz, A.; Crone, W. C.; Masters, K. S.,

Polyurethane/Dermatan Sulfate Copolymers as Hemocompatible, Non-Biofouling
Materials. Macromol. Biosci. 2011, 11 (2), 257-266; (b) Xu, F.; Nacker, J. C.; Crone, W.
C.; Masters, K. S., The haemocompatibility of polyurethane–hyaluronic acid copolymers.
Biomaterials 2008, 29 (2), 150-160.
59.

Okkema, A.; Cooper, S., Effect of carboxylate and/or sulphonate ion

incorporation on the physical and blood-contacting properties of a polyetherurethane.
Biomaterials 1991, 12 (7), 668-676.

32

Chapter 2. Synthesis and Anticoagulant Activity of Sulfated Glycopolymers with
Different Sugar Pendants

2.1 Abstract
In this chapter, polyurea-based synthetic glycopolymers containing sulfated glucose,
mannose, glucosamine or lactose as pendant groups had been synthesized by step-growth
polymerization of hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) and corresponding secondary
diamines. The obtained polymers were characterized by gel permeation chromatography
(GPC), nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FT-IR). The nonsulfated polymers showed similar results to the
commercially available biomaterial polyurethane Tecoflex in a platelet adhesion assay. The
average degree of sulfation after reaction with SO3 was calculated from elemental analysis
and found to be between three and four –OSO3 groups per saccharide. The bloodcompatibility of the synthetic polymers was measured using activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), thrombin time (TT), anti-IIa and antiXa assays. aPTT, PT and TT results indicated that the mannose and lactose based polymers
had the highest anticoagulant activities among all the sulfated polymers. The mechanism
of action of the polymers appears to be mediated via an anti-IIa pathway rather than an
anti-Xa pathway

2.2 Introduction
Biomaterials have a significant positive impact on quality of life for their recipients;
however, when a non-native biomaterial comes into contact with blood, a cascade reaction

33

may be initiated and results in protein adsorption on the non-native biomaterial, cellmaterial surface interaction, platelet adhesion and activation, and clot formation. Therefore,
a primary concern with using biomaterials is their blood compatibility. Polyurethanes have
been used in blood contacting biomaterials including catheters, blood filters, and blood
tubing as they typically possess excellent mechanical properties including strength,
moldability, and elasticity.1 Commercial brands of clinically used polyurethane materials
include Biomer (Johnson & Johnson), Mitrathane (PolyMedica Industries, Inc.), and
Pellethane and Tecoflex (The Lubrizol Corporation).2 However, typical polyurethanes
exhibit poor blood compatibility due to their hydrophobicity.3 One strategy to improve
blood compatibility of polyurethanes is to increase surface hydrophilicity by incorporating
other hydrophilic functional groups such as sulfates, carboxylates, and phosphonates. For
example, propyl sulfate groups were incorporated into the hard segments of a
poly(tetramethylene oxide)-based polyurethane. The sulfonated polymer was observed to
promote decreased platelet deposition with a delayed thrombin time (TT), raptilase time,
prothrombin time (PT), and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).4 In another
example, a sulfonated polyurea-urethane was prepared using a diamino disulfonic acid.5
Improved anticoagulant activity was observed as evidenced by a prolonged TT.
Polyurethanes have been synthesized with the naturally occurring biopolymer dermatan
sulfate to increase material hydrophilicity.6 Decreased protein adsorption and cell adhesion
were observed, which were attributed to the physical and biological properties of the
dermatan sulfate. Carboxylate groups can also be incorporated into polyurethane, but with
lower anticoagulating capacities in platelet deposition assays compared to sulfonated
polyurethanes.7

34

Surface heparinization and heparin-mimicking polymers provide an alternative strategy to
increase the hemocompatibility of biomaterials. Heparin is a linear, highly sulfated and
negatively charged polysaccharide and has been widely used as an injectable anticoagulant
for over 80 years.8 The anticoagulant activity of heparin is ascribed to its unique
pentasaccharide binding site, which exerts strong and specific binding with antithrombin
III (ATIII) to generate a heparin-ATIII binary complex.9 The heparin-ATIII binary complex
will further recognize and bind with thrombin or with factor Xa (FXa), both of which are
important blood coagulant factors, forming an ATIII-heparin-thrombin or ATIII-heparinFXa ternary complex.10 Although heparin is widely used as a clinical anticoagulant, it has
several

limitations,

particularly

for

unfractionated

heparin

(UFH).

Currently,

pharmaceutical grade heparin with an average molecular weight of 14 kDa is extracted
from mucosal tissues of slaughtered animals, such as porcine (pig) intestine or bovine (cow)
lung.11 Extracted heparin may possess heterogeneity in the carbohydrate structure and lead
to variable dose-response relationships for different patients. The extraction from animal
mucosal tissues may also introduce risks of pathogen contamination. The worldwide
outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and the global distribution of contaminated
heparin in 2008 highlighted these concerns.9, 11-12 Furthermore, exposure to heparin therapy
may result in adverse side effects such as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), which
is caused by the formation of an antibody against the heparin-platelet factor 4 complex.13
These drawbacks resulted in alternative forms of heparin being developed, namely low
molecular weight heparin (LMWH) and ultralow molecular weight heparin (ULMWH).
LMWH has an average molecular weight of 6.0 kDa and is produced from unfractionated
heparin by chemical or enzymatic degradation.14 ULMWH is a synthesized drug with the

35

trade name Arixtra and a molecular weight of 1508 Da.9, 15 Compared to unfractionated
heparin, LMWH and ULMWH exhibit more predictable anticoagulant doses, longer halflives, and reduced risks of side effects.16 However, LMWH is still derived from animals
with associated heterogeneity and potential pathogen contamination. Furthermore, the
synthesis of ULMWH requires more than 50 steps with an overall yield of only 0.1 %.17
Although improved synthetic methods have been proposed,15b, 18 Arixtra is still the most
expensive drug among the heparins. LMWH and ULMWH also exhibit limited inhibition
efficiency toward thrombin due to the shorter molecular length. In summary, there remains
a strong argument for safe and efficacious heparin-mimics with high anticoagulant activity
and minimal side effects.
Current methods to synthesize heparin-mimicking polymers focus on using anionic sulfate
groups, polymerization of sulfated saccharides, and sulfation of naturally occurring glycans.
Poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) has been used to replicate the anionic sulfate
domains of heparin.19 For example, poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate-co-poly(ethylene
glycol) methacrylate) (pSS-co-pPEGMA) with a terminal dithiocarbonate group was
synthesized by Maynard’s group19e. The dithiocarbonate was reduced to a thiol and
immobilized on a gold-coated surface plasmon resonance chip to investigate electrostatic
interactions of the polymer with basic fibroblast growth factor or vascular endothelial
growth factor. In another example, a polymer brush containing isopropylidene protected
glucose was obtained via atom transfer radical polymerization.20 After deprotection and
sulfation, the heparin-mimicking polymer displayed delayed clot formation and reduced
complement

activation.

Similarly,

sulfated

poly(glucosyloxyethyl

methacrylate)

(poly(GEMA)) has demonstrated anticoagulant activity through prolonged human blood

36

clotting times.21 Direct polymerization of sulfated saccharides has also been reported.
Chaikof’s group22 synthesized sulfated glucose, glucosamine and lactose monomers for
polymerization via a cyanoxyl-mediated free radical polymerization. The heparinmimicking polymers prolonged TT and aPTT.22d The Hsieh-Wilson group synthesized a
sulfated disaccharide monomer consisting of iduronic acid and glucosamine.23 Ringopening metathesis polymerization of this monomer was used to prepare heparinmimicking polymers with comparable anticoagulant activities at a concentration of 150
g/mL to heparin, LMWH and ULMWH. Recently, we published a nonionic
glycosaminoglycan polymer mimetic based on a methacryloyl backbone using RAFT
polymerization.24 Naturally occurring glycans, such as dextran and chitosan, have been
sulfated to produce heparin-mimicking polymers with anticoagulant effects. Baumann et
al published a detailed synthetic method for incorporation of O-sulfo, N-sulfo, N-acetyl,
and N-carboxymethyl groups into chitosan derivatives.25 Dextran based heparinmimicking polymers have been synthesized by ring-opening polymerization of anhydro
sugar derivatives.26. Sulfamide groups in these polymers were attributed to yield higher
anticoagulant properties than O-sulfated groups. The Fasl group synthesized chitosan with
high and low degrees of sulfation using a pyridine/SO3 complex or chlorosulfuric acid
respectively.27 The highly sulfated chitosan had a comparable anticoagulant potency to
heparin and dextran sulfate.
In this chapter, we synthesized heparin-mimicking polyureas using step-growth
polymerization with glucose, mannose, lactose, or glucosamine as pendant groups.
Polyureas were functionally similar to polyurethanes, and were also easily synthesized by
using diamines and diisocyanates. These new synthetic heparin-mimicking polymers

37

exhibited anticoagulant activities with respect to platelet adhesion, aPTT, PT and TT assays.
Furthermore, we also investigated the mechanism of action of these polymers using antiFXa and anti-FIIa assays.

2.3 Results and discussion
2.3.1

Polymer synthesis

We designed polymers containing glucose, mannose, lactose and glucosamine sugars. Our
aim was to compare polymers with different molecular structures with respect to their
performance in in vitro blood-compatibility assays. We chose to use glucose and mannose
sine they are monosaccharides with different stereochemistry. Lactose was selected to
compare monosaccharide and disaccharide pendant groups.22d, 22f Finally, the glucosamine
unit provided an amino group for N-sulfonation, which has been reported to enhance
hemocompatibility over O-sulfation.28
The synthetic route for the glucose tetramer G-T-06 is shown in Figure 2.1. This synthetic
route is adopted from our previous publications.29 N,N’-bis(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)ethane-1,2-diamine can be easily synthesized from ethylene diamine and 2nitrobenzenesulfonyl chloride (NsCl) in nearly quantitative yields.30

38

Figure 2.1. Synthetic route for glucose tetramer G-T-06.

Isopropylidene groups were chosen to protect D-glucose due to the resistance to the basic
reaction conditions used in the N-alkyl urea peptoid synthesis protocols, and also the easy
deprotection in acidic solutions. 1,2:5,6-di-O-isopropylidene-α-D-glucofuranose was used
as the starting material to synthesize 4-iodobutyl 1,2:5,6-di-O-isopropylidene-α-Dglucofuranoside (G-T-01) via a two-step reaction, as reported by Thiem’s group.31 Two
equivalents

of

G-T-01

were

reacted

with

one

equivalent

of

N,N’-bis(2-

nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine to generate the glucose dimer with 239

nitrobenzenesulfonyl (Ns) group protection (G-T-02), which was subsequently deprotected
using thiophenol to generate G-T-03. The obtained secondary amine underwent a chain
extension using a ring-opening reaction with N-(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-2-imidazolidone
to produce G-T-04. The Ns protected glucose tetramer G-T-05 was synthesized by the
reaction of G-T-04 with another two equivalents of G-T-01 followed by another
deprotection of the Ns groups to produce G-T-06. The structure of G-T-06 has been fully
characterized by NMR, FT-IR and mass spectrometry. In the 1H NMR spectrum, two
unique peaks at 2.80 and 2.66 ppm were assigned as arising from the four CH2 backbone
protons. Mass spectrometry also confirmed this structure and a molecular ion peak was
observed at m/z = 1489.8448 M+H+ (calculated: 1489.8644).
The glucose tetramer, G-T-06, was used as an A-A monomer and polymerized using a stepgrowth polymerization with HDI as the B-B monomer in anhydrous DMF solution at 80
C, as shown in Figure 2.2 to yield polymer poly(HDI-G-T). Equal moles of both
monomers were used to guarantee high molecular weight polymers.

Figure 2.2. Polymerization of G-T-06 with HDI and its deprotection and sulfation.
40

Poly(HDI-G-T) was purified by precipitation into cold ethyl ether from dichloromethane
three times. The number-average molecular weight (Mn), weight-average molecular weight
(Mw), and polydispersity index (PDI) were determined using GPC as 41.9 kDa, 47.8 kDa
and 1.14, respectively (Table 2.1). This is a rather low value for the polydispersity of a
step-growth polymer, and likely an artifact of the chromatography. The structure of the
obtained polymer was confirmed using 1H NMR spectroscopy with two broad peaks at
3.23 and 1.57 ppm from the CH2 protons of both G-T-06 and HDI, indicating the addition
of HDI to G-T-06.

Table 2.1. GPC data for the synthesized polymers.a (Note the nomenclature G, M, GA, L,
T and D stands for glucose, mannose, glucosamine, lactose, tetramer and dimer,
respectively.)
polymer

a

Mn (kDa)

Mw (kDa)

PDI

poly(HDI-G-T)

41.9

47.8

1.14

poly(HDI-M-T)

37.8

96.3

2.55

poly(HDI-L-D)

27.0

47.3

1.75

poly(HDI-GA-D)

15.7

26.8

1.71

poly(HDI-G-D)

26.7

44.9

1.68

poly(HDI-M-D)

22.7

32.0

1.41

: The data were collected using THF as the mobile phase at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min with

refractive index and light scattering detectors.

41

The isopropylidene protecting groups of the polymer, poly(HDI-G-T), were removed using
an 80% TFA/H2O solution for 30 min,20, 29a and purified by precipitation into cold ethyl
ether three times. The successful reaction was confirmed with 1H NMR spectroscopy,
where the disappearance of the CH3 peaks from the isopropylidene groups was observed.
Peaks at 5.07 and 4.47 ppm were assigned as α- and β- anomeric protons, since the
deprotection of the anomeric hydroxyl group generated both α- and β- anomers of
glucopyranose. 13C and DEPT-135 NMR spectra were performed to corroborate that the
isopropylidene groups were removed by inspecting the unique primary and quaternary
carbon peaks from the isopropylidene groups. As expected, none of these peaks were
observed in either spectrum, indicating the complete removal of the isopropylidene groups.
In the FT-IR spectrum, a strong absorption peak at 3312 cm-1 for depro(HDI-G-T) was also
observed due to the free hydroxyl groups (Figure 2.3). Furthermore, the existing peak at
160 ppm in the 13C NMR spectrum and the absorption peaks at 1602 and 1539 cm-1 in the
FT-IR spectrum indicated that the carbonyl functional groups from the N-alkyl urea peptoid
oligomer were still intact and did not undergo any type of side reaction under the
deprotection conditions.

42

poly(HDI-G-T)

% Reflectance

depro(HDI-G-T)

sulf(HDI-G-T)

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500
-1
wavenumbers (cm )

1000

500

Figure 2.3. FT-IR spectra of poly(HDI-G-T), depro(HDI-G-T) and sulf(HDI-G-T).

The hydroxyl groups on the sugars were converted to sulfate groups using a SO3/pyridine
reagent.20 The final polymer was purified by dialysis for 4 days against deionized water
and isolated through lyophilization. The presence of the sulfate groups in the obtained
heparin-mimetic polymer, sulf(HDI-G-T), was confirmed by FT-IR, as both asymmetric
valence vibrations and symmetric valence fluctuations of the O=S=O group and the C–O–
S valence fluctuations were observed at 1223, 1064 and 964 cm-1 (Figure 2.3). The degree
of sulfation was determined using elemental analysis and calculated to be an average of 3.5
sulfate groups per saccharide (Table 2.2).

Table 2.2. Elemental analysis data of the sulfated polymers and the calculated degrees of

43

sulfation.

a

polymer

carbon

hydrogen

nitrogen

sodium

sulfur

DSa

sulf(HDI-G-T)

27.22%

4.97%

4.24%

6.15%

12.88%

3.5

sulf(HDI-M-T)

24.71%

4.71%

3.50%

7.56%

14.57%

3.5

sulf(HDI-L-D)

18.08%

3.44%

2.36%

10.27%

15.42%

6.88

sulf(HDI-GA-D)

25.33%

4.50%

6.30%

7.57%

14.09%

3.68

sulf(HDI-G-D)

20.28%

3.42%

3.87%

10.81%

16.45%

3.95

sulf(HDI-M-D)

19.57%

3.55%

3.63%

10.81%

16.45%

3.99

: DS = average degree of sulfation per saccharide; per disaccharide for sulf(HDI-L-D).

A similar synthetic strategy to that used for the glucose oligomer was applied to the
synthesis of the mannose tetramer (Figure 2.4). 4-iodobutyl 2,3;5,6-di-O-isopropylideneα-D-mannofuranoside (M-T-01) was obtained using a similar synthetic route as G-T01.31,32 However, the iodobutyl group is connected to the anomeric hydroxyl group in MT-01, rather than the C3 position in G-T-01.

44

Figure 2.4. Synthetic route for the mannose tetramer M-T-06.

The structure of the mannose tetramer M-T-06 was confirmed using NMR, FT-IR and mass
spectrometry. In the 1H NMR spectrum, two unique peaks at 2.77 and 2.63 ppm were
assigned as the four CH2 backbone protons. A molecular ion peak observed at m/z =
1489.8516 M+H+ (calculated: 1489.8644) further confirmed the obtained mannose
tetramer M-T-06. The M-T-06 tetramer was then polymerized with HDI via a step-growth
polymerization (Figure 2.5).

45

Figure 2.5. Polymerization of M-T-06 with HDI and its deprotection and sulfation.

GPC characterization of the final polymer gave values of 37.8 kDa, 96.3 kDa and 2.55, for
the Mn, Mw and PDI, respectively (Table 2.1). The deprotected polymer, depro(HDI-M-T),
was obtained through an acidic hydrolysis of the isopropylidene groups, which was
confirmed using NMR and FT-IR of the polymer and contact angle measurements of
solvent-cast films of the polymer. In the 1H NMR spectrum, the disappearance of the CH3
protons indicated the removal of the isopropylidene groups. 13C and DEPT-135 NMR
spectra confirmed the disappearance of both primary and quaternary carbons from
isopropylidene groups. Meanwhile, the carbon peak at 160 ppm indicated the retention of
the urea functional groups in the oligomer. A comparison of FT-IR spectra for poly(HDIM-T), depro(HDI-M-T) and sulf(HDI-M-T) is shown in Figure 2.6. The free hydroxyl
groups in depro(HDI-M-T) are observed as a strong absorption peak at 3328 cm-1, as well
as peaks at 1608 and 1539 cm-1 for C=O functional groups.
46

poly(HDI-M-T)

% Reflectance

depro(HDI-M-T)

sulf(HDI-M-T)

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500
-1
wavenumbers (cm )

1000

500

Figure 2.6. FT-IR spectra of poly(HDI-M-T), depro(HDI-M-T) and sulf(HDI-M-T).

Depro(HDI-M-T) was sulfated in anhydrous pyridine solution with a SO3/pyridine
complex at 100 C for 20 h.20 After purification by dialysis against deionized water for 4
days, the heparin-mimicking polymer, sulf(HDI-M-T), was obtained by lyophilization. The
success of the sulfation reaction was confirmed using FT-IR and 13C NMR, with strong
peaks at 1219 and 1047 cm-1 for asymmetric valence vibrations and symmetric valence
fluctuations of the O=S=O groups, as well as the C–O–S valence fluctuations at 926 cm-1
observed in the FT-IR spectrum (Figure 2.6). The urea functional groups were identified
both by absorption peaks at 1620 and 1546 cm-1 in the FT-IR spectrum, and a 13C NMR
chemical shift of 159.57 ppm. The elemental analysis data for sulf(HDI-M-T) are shown
47

in Table 2.2 and the degree of sulfation was calculated to be an average of 3.5 SO3 groups
per saccharide.

However, when isopropylidene protecting groups were used to protect lactose, the products
were unstable.33 We therefore switched to acetyl groups to protect the sugar hydroxyls.
Furthermore, we prepared the simplified dimer-based monomers rather than the tetramerbased versions. The rationale for the simplification was based on making the synthesis,
purification, and characterization easier with a minimal loss of information in the final
polymers. The synthetic route for the lactose monomer is as follows: lactose was acetylated
with acetic anhydride and catalytic iodine, followed by selective anomeric deprotection
using benzyl amine to give L-D-03. The trichloroacetimidate product (L-D-04) was
obtained by reacting L-D-03 with trichloroacetonitrile and a catalytic amount of 1,8diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene (DBU). Glycosylation of L-D-04 with 2-bromoethanol
and BF3Et2O resulted in L-D-05, which was converted to the iodide (L-D-06) derivative
under reflux with NaI in acetone. Excess L-D-06 was reacted with N,N’-bis(2nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine at 50 ˚C to ensure the complete consumption of
the diamine. The obtained product, L-D-07, was deprotected using thiophenol to produce
diamine L-D-08, which has been fully characterized by NMR, FT-IR and mass
spectrometry. The complete synthesis is shown in Figure 2.7.

48

Figure 2.7. Synthetic route for the lactose dimer-based diamine monomer (L-D-08).

Poly(HDI-L-D) was prepared by reacting L-D-08 with HDI in anhydrous DMF at 60 C
for 40 h, as shown in Figure 2.8. Poly(HDI-L-D) was purified by precipitation into cold
ethyl ether, and GPC analysis showed the Mn, Mw and PDI to be 27.0 kDa, 47.3 kDa, and
1.75, respectively (Table 2.1).

49

Figure 2.8. Synthetic route for poly(HDI-L-D), depro(HDI-L-D), and sulf(HDI-L-D).

The deprotection of the acetyl groups from poly(HDI-L-D) was performed in anhydrous
methanol solution with a catalytic amount of NaOMe, which yielded depro(HDI-L-D). The
successful deprotection was confirmed using 1H NMR spectroscopy by the disappearance
of the acetyl CH3 group’s signals at 1.96–2.15 ppm. 13C and DEPT-135 NMR spectroscopy
were performed to further corroborate the deprotection of all the acetyl groups using the
unique primary (CH3) and acetyl quaternary (C=O) carbon peaks. As expected, none of
these peaks were observed in either spectrum, which indicated the complete removal of the
acetyl groups. Furthermore, the existing peaks at 159.71, 102.39 and 102.86 ppm in the 13C

50

NMR spectrum indicated the carbonyl groups from the N-alkyl urea groups and the
disaccharide units were still intact and no side reactions occurred. The disappearance of
the strong absorption peak at 1740 cm-1 for the protected ester group and the new strong
absorption peak at 3311 cm-1 due to the free hydroxyl groups were also observed in the FTIR spectrum (Figure 2.9).

% Reflectance

sulf(HDI-L-D)

depro(HDI-L-D)

poly(HDI-L-D)

3750

3000

2250

1500

750

-1

Wavenumbers (cm )

Figure 2.9. FT-IR spectra for poly(HDI-L-D), depro(HDI-L-D), and sulf(HDI-L-D).

A SO3/pyridine complex in pyridine was used to convert the sugar hydroxyl groups to
sulfate groups.20 The sulfated heparin-mimicking polymer sulf(HDI-L-D) was purified by
dialyzing in water and isolated by lyophilization. FT-IR was used to confirm the successful

51

sulfation reaction, and signals from the O=S=O group and the C–O–S bonds were observed
at 1225, 1004, and 930 cm-1 (Figure 2.9). The average degree of sulfation was calculated
to be 6.88 sulfates per disaccharide (Table 2.2) using elemental analysis.

The glucosamine-containing monomer was prepared using a similar strategy to that of the
lactose monomer, as shown in Figure 2.10. The azido group was selected to protect the
amino group because of its resistance to both acidic and basic reaction conditions and its
easy reduction to an amine by Pd/C hydrogenation. The structure of the glucosamine dimer,
GA-D-08, was confirmed by NMR, FT-IR and mass spectrometry. The unique peaks at
2.85 and 2.89–2.97 ppm in the 1H NMR spectrum are assigned to the protons from the four
CH2 groups connected to N atoms and the peak at 2110 cm-1 in the FT-IR spectrum is
assigned to the azide absorption. Mass spectrometry also confirmed the successful
synthesis of GA-D-08, where a molecular ion peak was observed at m/z = 775.3101 M+H+
(calculated: 775.3110). The synthesized GA-D-08 monomer was polymerized with HDI
via a step-growth polymerization (Figure 2.11).

52

Figure 2.10. Synthetic route for the glucosamine dimer-based diamine monomer.

Figure 2.11. Synthetic route for poly(HDI-GA-D), depro(HDI-GA-D)-NH2, depro(HDIGA-D), and sulf(HDI-GA-D).
53

The Mn, Mw and PDI values for poly(HDI-GA-D) are 15.7 kDa, 26.8 kDa and 1.71,
respectively (Table 2.1). The reduction of azido to amino groups was performed using Pd/C
hydrogenation at 60 psi for 7 days. The 13C NMR and DEPT-135 spectra confirmed the
complete reduction. The azido absorption peak at 2111 cm-1 was also absent in the FT-IR
spectrum, while the strong NH2 absorption peak at 3288 cm-1 further corroborated the
complete reduction of azido groups to amino groups.
The deprotection of the acetyl groups was carried out in anhydrous methanol with a
catalytic amount of NaOMe to generate depro(HDI-GA-D). The removal of the acetyl
groups was confirmed using NMR and FT-IR similarly to the lactose-containing polymer.
Depro(HDI-GA-D) was sulfated in the same way as the lactose polymer, which gave the
heparin-mimicking polymer sulf(HDI-GA-D). The successful sulfation reaction was
confirmed by FT-IR and 13C NMR spectroscopy. A comparison of the FT-IR spectra for
poly(HDI-GA-D), depro(HDI-GA-D)-NH2, depro(HDI-GA-D), and sulf(HDI-GA-D) is
presented in Figure 2.12. The average degree of sulfation was calculated from elemental
analysis as 3.68 SO3 groups per saccharide.

54

sulf(HDI-GA-D)

% Reflectance

depro(HDI-GA-D)

depro(HDI-GA-D)-NH2

poly(HDI-GA-D)

3750

3000

2250

1500
-1

750

Wavenumbers (cm )

Figure 2.12. FT-IR spectra for poly(HDI-GA-D), depro(HDI-GA-D)-NH2, depro(HDIGA-D), and sulf(HDI-GA-D).

Polymers prepared from dimer-based glucose and mannose diamine monomers with acetyl
protecting groups were also synthesized. The glucose-containing polymer is designated as
poly(HDI-G-D) and the mannose-containing polymer is designated as poly(HDI-M-D).
The molecular structures are provided in Figure 2.13. This allowed us to probe
structure/property relationships compared to the polymers prepared with the tetrafunctionalized monomers.34 Specifically, the influence of the position on the ring where
the sugar is attached to the polymer, and also the effect of a pyranose ring vs. a furanose
55

ring for the mannose-containing polymers were examined. The experimental details are
similar to those used for lactose and are provided in the Experimental Section. The Mn, Mw,
and PDI values were 26.7 kDa, 44.9 kDa, and 1.68 for poly(HDI-G-D), and 22.7 kDa, 32.0
kDa, and 1.41 for poly(HDI-M-D), respectively. After deprotection and sulfation, polymers
sulf(HDI-G-D) and sulf(HDI-M-D) were obtained. The average degree of sulfation was
calculated to be 3.95 and 3.99 per saccharide, respectively.

Figure 2.13. Chemical structures of glucose containing polymers, poly(HDI-G-D),
depro(HDI-G-D) and sulf(HDI-G-D), and mannose containing polymers, poly(HDI-M-D),
depro(HDI-M-D), and sulf(HDI-M-D).

2.3.2

Contact angle measurements

The blood compatibility of biomaterials can be greatly affected by the surface
56

hydrophilicity of materials.35 Contact angle measurement is an accepted method to
characterize a surface with respect to its hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity. Solvent-cast thin
films of the synthesized polymers were used to measure contact angles at different
locations on the films and the static, receding, and advancing contact angles were recorded
(Table 2.3). Tecoflex is a commercial polyurethane that possesses carbamate functional
groups. We used Tecoflex as a comparison with our synthesized polymers because of its
wide application in blood-contacting biomaterials, including for cardiovascular devices.36
For glucose and mannose polymers from the tetramer-based monomers, the static contact
angles were 73º and 71º for poly(HDI-G-T) and poly(HDI-M-T), respectively. This
indicated that the films were hydrophobic as expected from the hydrophobic
isopropylidene protecting groups. The deprotected glucose and mannose polymers,
depro(HDI-G-T) and depro(HDI-M-T), were measured to be hydrophilic with static
contact angle values of 38º and 32º, respectively. Compared to the isopropylidene-protected
polymers, the contact angles of acetyl-protected polymers had much lower values. The
static contact angles of poly(HDI-L-D), poly(HDI-GA-D), poly(HDI-G-D) and poly(HDIM-D) were 43º, 39º, 42º and 47º, respectively. These values indicated that the acetylprotected polymers were hydrophilic due to the polar ester groups in the polymer structures.
After deprotection, the polymers, depro(HDI-L-D), depro(HDI-GA-D), depro(HDI-G-D)
and depro(HDI-M-D) were observed to be hydrophilic with similar contact angles as those
of depro(HDI-G-T) and depro(HDI-M-T). Solvent-casting thin films of Tecoflex afforded
a static contact angle of 61º, which indicates that it is more hydrophobic than our polymers.
No contact angles could be measured for the sulfated polymers because they are completely
wetting surfaces and the solvent-cast thin films dissolved upon contact with water.

57

Therefore, all of the sulfonated polymers are highly hydrophilic, which implies that they
are candidates for blood compatible materials.

Table 2.3. Contact angle measurements of the synthesized polymers and Tecoflex.
polymer

θ (deg) (static)

θ (deg) (advancing)

θ (deg) (receding)

poly(HDI-G-T)

73

81

61

depro(HDI-G-T)

38

44

24

poly(HDI-M-T)

71

80

67

depro(HDI-M-T)

32

38

22

poly(HDI-L-D)

43

49

31

depro(HDI-L-D)

30

45

20

poly(HDI-GA-D)

39

46

29

depro(HDI-GA-D)

30

42

20

poly(HDI-G-D)

42

47

31

depro(HDI-G-D)

28

39

21

poly(HDI-M-D)

47

54

40

depro(HDI-M-D)

33

45

26

Tecoflex

61

68

53

2.3.3

Platelet adhesion assay

Platelet adhesion assays are a widely used method to evaluate the blood-compatibility of
blood contacting materials. The number of adherent platelets quantifies the activation of
platelets to the materials, and a higher number of adherent platelets is inferred as a less

58

blood-compatible material.6, 37 The nonsulfated polymers and Tecoflex were spin-coated
on Si wafers and incubated in platelet rich plasma for 1 hour. After the adhered platelets
were fixed using 2% glutaraldehyde/TBS solution, the wafers were examined by scanning
electron microscopy (SEM). Tecoflex was used as a comparison since it is a widely used
biomaterial.36 The number of adherent platelets for Tecoflex was similar to that of
depro(HDI-M-T). Although hydrophilicity plays an important role in bloodcompatibility,37a, 38 other factors also play important roles in many biomaterials (e.g.
charged ionomers).37b This effect is seen in the difference between our nonsulfated
polymers and Tecoflex. Tecoflex has a much higher static contact angle than do the
nonsulfated polymers, but it exhibited comparable platelet adhesion results. We anticipate
that in similar assays the sulfated polymers would demonstrate improved performance over
the nonsulfated polymers because of factors including increased osmotic pressure at the
interface and electrostatic repulsion of factors such as fibrin that can promote platelet
adherence. However, results from spin cast films of the sulfated polymers would be
challenging to interpret because of the stability issues described for contact angle
measurements.

2.3.4

Anticoagulant assay

Sulfated sugars have been proven in literature to exhibit anticoagulant activities by
prolonging blood clotting time using assays such as aPTT, TT, blood recalcification time,
PT, etc.20-21, 22c-f, 23a The aPTT assay is widely used to measure the hemostatic efficiency of
both the intrinsic and common pathways, which include factors II, V, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII
and fibrinogen.39 It is a standard clinical assay for monitoring unfractionated therapeutic

59

levels. A prolonged clotting time indicates an increase in anticoagulant activity, while a
shorter clotting time demonstrates a faster conversion of fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin
and the formation of thrombus. In this case, “prolonged” refers to an extended time for clot
formation versus “normal”. A “normal” aPTT would be 28-30 s in our assays. The
anticoagulant activities of our synthesized polymers were investigated by measuring the
aPTT in murine plasma spiked with the sulfated polymers. The nonsulfated, hydroxylated
polymers exhibited no anticoagulant activities as measured by this assay, with the
exception of a mild prolongation with deprotected glucosamine. This shows the importance
of characterizing these novel biomaterials in assays beyond platelet adhesion assays. The
average aPTT values are reported in Table 2.4 and are compared graphically in Figure 2.14
for the sulfated polymers. The aPTT values are all in seconds and are absolute times rather
than an extended time past “normal”. The sulfated polymers induced a significantly
prolonged aPTT. The mild prolongation seen with deprotected glucosamine was significant
compared to plasma both with and without other deprotected polymers (p < 0.05). At a
concentration of 500 µg/mL, the mean aPTT was 41.6 s, as opposed to > 300 s with sulfated
glucosamine. The range of aPTTs at 50 µg/mL of sulf(HDI-L-D), sulf(HDI-G-D), and
sulf(HDI-M-D) include values in and above the typical clinical therapeutic range for
unfractionated heparin.

Table 2.4. PT assay times in seconds with various concentrations of polymers prepared in
this work. The data is an average of duplicate measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5
seconds.
polymer

polymer concentration (g/mL)

60

0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(HDI-G-T)

24.0

24.5

30.0

62.5

sulf(HDI-M-T)

24.5

27.0

39.0

>300

sulf(HDI-G-D)

30.0

40.0

117

>300

sulf(HDI-M-D)

31.5

42.0

188

>300

sulf(HDI-L-D)

27.5

39.5

144

>300

sulf(HDI-GA-D)

28.0

35.0

69.0

>300

The clotting times (aPTT) increased as the concentration of all the sulfated polymers
exhibited increased. Except for sulf(HDI-G-T), the clotting times exceeded 300 s when the
concentration reached 500 g/mL. These results are comparable with related literature.22d,
23a

For example, a lactose/acrylamide copolymer reported by Chaikof used concentrations

of 79.9 and 184.0 g/mL to attain aPTTs of 100 and 200 s respectively.22d Similarly, a
recently published heparin-mimicking polymer by Hsieh-Wilson group reported an aPTT
of 119.4±0.5 s for 150 g/mL of polymer.23a The hierarchy of the anticoagulant activities
of our polymers can be seen from Figure 2.14 in the order of mannose (dimer) > lactose >
glucose (dimer) > glucosamine > mannose (tetramer) > glucose (tetramer). The sulfated
glucose and mannose tetramer polymers, sulf(HDI-G-T) and sulf(HDI-M-T), showed the
lowest anticoagulant activity, which might be attributed to the free anomeric group of
sulf(HDI-G-T) and the furanose ring of sulf(HDI-M-T). The glucosamine containing
polymer, sulf(HDI-GA-D), afforded a lower anticoagulant activity than did sulf(HDI-MD), sulf(HDI-L-D) or sulf(HDI-G-D), which while initially surprising, is consistent with
some previously reported results.22d

61

300

aPTT (s)

250

200

sulf(HDI-L-D)
sulf(HDI-M-T)
sulf(HDI-G-T)
sulf(HDI-M-D)
sulf(HDI-G-D)
sulf(HDI-GA-D)

150

100

50

0
0.1

1

10

concentration(g/mL)

100

1000

Figure 2.14. aPTT assay results in seconds of sulfated heparin mimicking polymers at
various concentrations.

To further show the blood-compatibility of our polymers and verify the results of the aPTT
assay we performed a PT assay. The results are collected in Table 2.5 where the data are
the PT values in seconds. For comparison purposes a HEPES buffer solution was used as
a negative control with a recorded PT value of 14.5 s, and a 0.7 IU/mL heparin solution
was used as a positive control, with a recorded PT value of >60 s.

Table 2.5. PT assay times in seconds with various concentrations of polymers prepared in
this work. The data is an average of duplicate measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5
62

seconds.
polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(HDI-G-T)

15.0

14.0

14.0

13.5

sulf(HDI-M-T)

14.0

13.5

13.5

15.5

sulf(HDI-G-D)

14.0

14.0

>60

>60

sulf(HDI-M-D)

14.0

14.0

>60

>60

sulf(HDI-L-D)

14.5

13.0

>60

>60

sulf(HDI-GA-D)

14.0

14.0

14.0

>60

Similar to aPTT, the nonsulfated, hydroxylated polymers exhibited no anticoagulant
activities in the PT assay at all concentrations. Unlike the aPTT assay this assay did not
prove to be discriminative between the dimer-based polymers beyond a binary yes or no
result with respect to blood-compatibility based on the control measurement. Despite this
fact, the assay does show the blood compatibility of the dimer-based polymers, and in
particular those containing lactose and mannose sugars. Similarly, we performed a TT assay,
and the results are shown in Table 2.6. For comparison purposes a HEPES buffer solution
with wild-type mouse plasma was used as a negative control with a recorded TT value of
21 s, and heparin solutions with concentrations of 0.1–0.7 units/mL were used as positive
controls, and all gave recorded TT values of >75 s.

Table 2.6. TT assay times in seconds with various concentrations of polymers prepared in
this work. The data is an average of duplicate measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5

63

seconds.
polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(HDI-G-T)

23.0

23.5

>75

>75

sulf(HDI-M-T)

23.0

20.5

>75

>75

sulf(HDI-G-D)

24.0

27.5

>75

>75

sulf(HDI-M-D)

22.0

>75

>75

>75

sulf(HDI-L-D)

25.0

>75

>75

>75

sulf(HDI-GA-D)

23.0

24.5

>75

>75

As was the case for the PT assay, the TT assay did not prove to be discriminative between
the polymers beyond a binary yes or no result with respect to blood-compatibility based on
the control measurement. However, the polymers containing lactose- and mannose-based
diamines proved to show the highest blood-compatibility as measured by the TT assay.

2.3.5

Anti-FXa and anti-FIIa activity

The primary mechanism of action for anticoagulation using heparin is the facilitation of
binding the serine protease inhibitor (SERPIN) ATIII with two of the common pathway
hemostatic serine proteases: factors Xa and thrombin (IIa). To directly determine the effect
of sulfated polymers on the activity of these two enzymes, chromogenic anti-Xa and antiIIa assays were used. These assays measure the chromogenic activity of exogenous Xa or
IIa when added to plasma that contains heparin. The assays use exogenous ATIII to
minimize sample-to-sample variation, which allows the heparin level to be the primary

64

variable in the assay. The anti-Xa assay is the most common version of this assay used in
clinical practice. Plasma aliquots were spiked with sulfated polymers to final
concentrations from 125-500 µg/mL. Only polymers sulf(HDI-L-D) and sulf(HDI-M-D)
exhibited any anti-Xa activity in this assay. At 500 µg/mL, both polymers had activity
consistent with 0.1 units/mL of heparin (data not shown), which is less activity than needed
for therapeutic treatment with UFH; however, it is unclear at this stage if this activity would
be sufficient for using these polymers as blood-contacting biomaterials.
A chromogenic anti-IIa assay was then used to determine if the observed prolongation of
the aPTT was due primarily to anti-IIa activity rather than anti-Xa activity. Again, plasma
was spiked with sulfated polymers prior to the determination of anti-IIa activity. With this
assay, the highest anti-IIa activity was observed at 500 µg/mL of sulf(HDI-G-D) and
sulf(HDI-M-D), with heparin activity of 0.8 units/mL and 0.7 units/mL, respectively.
Sulf(HDI-L-D) also exhibited therapeutic-range anti-Xa activity, at 0.4 units/mL (Figure
2.15). To test if the sulfated polymers inhibit thrombin activity via an ATIII dependent
mechanism, we repeated the anti-IIa assay in ATIII deficient plasma and removed
exogenous ATIII from the reaction mixture. This assay was run with the three polymers
with anti-IIa activity that fell into the therapeutic range. Heparin, as expected, had no effect
on thrombin activity in the absence of ATIII; however, the sulfated polymers exhibited a
dose dependent inhibition of thrombin activity in the absence of ATIII. The relative activity
of these three polymers in this assay was sulf(HDI-M-D)>sulf(HDI-L-D)>sulf(HDI-G-D);
hence, the sulfated polymers may inhibit IIa activity by both ATIII-dependent and ATIII–
independent mechanisms.

65

1.0

UFH anti-IIa unit

0.8

0.6

sulf(HDI-L-D)
sulf(HDI-GA-D)
sulf(HDI-M-T)
sulf(HDI-M-D)
sulf(HDI-G-T)
sulf(HDI-G-D)

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.01

0.1

1

concentration (mg/mL)

Figure 2.15. Activity of the sulfated heparin mimicking polymers at various concentrations
in the anti FIIa assay.

2.4 Conclusions
Step-growth polymerization was used to synthesize six N-alkyl urea containing polymers,
with glucose, mannose, glucosamine or lactose as pendant groups. The obtained polymers
were deprotected and sulfated to obtain highly hydrophilic heparin-mimicking
glycopolymers. The blood compatibility of the sulfated polymers has been demonstrated
by prolonged aPTT, PT, and TT. Sulf(HDI-M-D) and sulf(HDI-L-D) exhibited the highest
anticoagulant activity as determined by these assays. None of the polymers expressed any
significant anti-Xa activity; however, three polymers, sulf(HDI-M-D), sulf(HDI-L-D), and
sulf(HDI-G-D), demonstrated therapeutic level anti-IIa activity at a concentration of 500
66

µg/mL. The mechanism of thrombin inhibition remains unclear at this stage, and may be
via both ATIII-dependent and ATIII-independent routes.

2.5 Experimental section
2.5.1

Materials and instruments

Glucose, lactose and sodium azide were purchased from Fisher Scientific, Matherson
Coleman & Bell Co. and Amresco-inc, respectively. All other chemicals were ordered from
Sigma-Aldrich and used as received without further purification. N,N’-bis(2nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine was synthesized according to literature
procedures.30 Pre-treated standard grade, regenerated cellulose dialysis membrane with an
approximate molecular weight cut off (MWCO) of 3.5 kDa was obtained from Spectrum
Labs. The 24-well tissue culture plates were ordered from Fisher Scientific. TecoflexTM
MG-8020 was kindly provided by The Lubrizol Corporation. Si wafers were purchased
from Wafer World, Inc. Platelet rich plasma (~3x105 platelets/mL) was purchased from the
Hoxworth Blood Center at the University of Cincinnati, and used the same day it was
prepared from freshly drawn blood.
1

H and 13C NMR measurements were performed with a Bruker Ultrashield 400 MHz (100

MHz for 13C NMR) instrument. The obtained data were processed using either
MestReNova or ACD/NMR Processor Academic Edition. FT-IR were collected on a
Nicolet 6700 spectrometer and analyzed with OMNIC32 software. Mass spectrometry was
performed using a Micromass Q-TOF-2TM spectrometer. Galbraith Laboratories Inc.
performed elemental analyses. A Ramé-hart contact angle goniometer (Model 200-F1) with
tilting stage was used to measure contact angles. Platelet-adhesion assays were analyzed

67

with an EFI XL30 ESEM at 20 kV. Molecular weight averages of polymers were
determined using GPC with an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC equipped with a PSS SDV Lux
column (5 μm) guard column and two PSS SDV Linear XL Lux Columns (5 μm) (linear
range of MW = 100 – 3 × 106 g/mol), using a filtered tetrahydrofuran (THF) containing 200
ppm 2,6-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-4-methylphenol (BHT) mobile phase at a flow rate of 1.0
mL/min at ambient temperature and miniDAWN TREOS light scattering (60 mW GaAs
linearly polarized laser, 658 nm) and Optilab rEX differential refractometer (light source =
658 nm; Wyatt Technology Corporation) detectors. The polymers were dissolved in eluent
THF and filtered through 0.2 μm membrane filters before injection. ASTRA software v.
5.4.14 was used to determine the molecular weight averages and polydispersity.
2.5.2

Polymer synthesis

Synthesis of compound G-T-02

A solution of N,N’-bis(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine (6.14 g, 1.0 equiv.), 4iodobutyl 1,2:5,6-di-O-isopropylidene-α-D-glucofuranoside (G-T-01, 15.77 g, 2.5 equiv.)
and potassium carbonate (7.88 g, 4.0 equiv.) in DMF (140 mL, 0.1 M solution) was stirred
at 80 C for 24 h. The DMF was removed and DCM added to dissolve the residue. After
filtration through Celite and concentration the crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexane:EtOAc = 1:1 to EtOAc), giving 14.8 g of the desired product.
Yield = 98 %.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.99–7.97 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.74–7.69 (m, 4H, Ar-H),

68

7.65–7.61 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 5.85 (d, Ja,b = 3.6 Hz, 2 H, a-H), 4.55 (d, Ja,b = 3.6 Hz, 2 H, bH), 4.28–4.23 (m, 2 H, e-H), 4.15–4.10 (m, 2 H, d-H), 4.06–4.02 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 3.99–3.95
(m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.83 (d, Jc,d = 2.8 Hz, 2 H, c-H), 3.64–3.52 (m, 4 H, k-H), 3.49 (s, 4 H, 1H), 3.34–3.01 (m, 4 H, n-H), 1.71–1.64 (m, 4 H, l-H), 1.56–1.53 (m, 4 H, m-H), 1.49, 1.42,
1.33, 1.31 (4 × s, 4 × 6 H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 148.28 (C-NO2), 133.91 (=C-H), 132.87 (=C-SO2),

131.91 (=C-H), 130.74 (=C-H), 124.35 (=C-H), 111.86 (C(CH3)2), 109.08 (C(CH3)2),
105.40 (C-a), 82.50 (C-b), 82.32 (C-c), 81.20 (C-d), 72.65 (C-e), 69.89 (C-k), 67.30 (C-f),
49.30 (C-1), 47.30 (C-n), 31.10 (C-l), 26.96 (C-m), 26.81 (CH3), 26.33 (CH3), 25.53 (CH3),
25.43 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2986, 2936, 1545, 1372, 1162, 1074, 1019;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1081.3627 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1081.3610 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound G-T-03

Compound G-T-02 (17.0 g, 1.0 equiv.) was dissolved in DMF (160 mL, 0.1 M) and
potassium carbonate (11.09 g, 5.0 equiv.) was added. The solution was purged with
nitrogen for 30 min before adding thiophenol (6.59 mL, 4.0 equiv.). The resulting solution
was stirred at room temperature overnight. DMF was removed and DCM was added to
dissolve the residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product
was purified by flash column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH:Et3N = 500:100:6),
giving 11.0 g product in 99 % yield.

69

1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.87 (d, Ja,b = 3.6 Hz, 2 H, a-H), 4.52 (d, Ja,b = 3.6

Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.32–4.27 (m, 2 H, e-H), 4.13–4.10 (m, 2 H, d-H), 4.07–4.06 (m, 2 H, f-Ha),
4.00–3.97 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.85 (d, Jc,d = 2.4 Hz, 2 H, c-H), 3.64–3.51 (m, 4 H, k-H), 2.72
(s, 4 H, 1-H), 2.64–2.60 (m, 4 H, n-H), 1.62–1.53 (m, 8 H, m-H, l-H), 1.50, 1.42, 1.35, 1.32
(4 × s, 4 × 6 H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 111.73 (C(CH3)2), 108.90 (C(CH3)2), 105.24 (C-a),

82.51 (C-b), 82.09 (C-c), 81.13 (C-d), 72.49 (C-e), 70.49 (C-k), 67.23 (C-f), 49.75 (C-n),
49.49 (C-1), 27.58 (C-l), 26.83 (C-m), 26.80 (CH3), 26.75 (CH3), 26.24 (CH3), 25.45 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2985, 2934, 1371, 1214, 1072, 1019, 848;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 689.4210 M+H+ (Calculated: 689.4225 M+H+).
Synthesis of compound G-T-04

A solution of compound G-T-03 (3.92 g, 1.0 equiv.), 4-dimethylaminopyridine (0.70 g, 1.0
equiv.), and N-(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-2-imidazolidone (3.40 g, 2.2 equiv.) in pyridine
(50 mL, 0.11 M) was purged with nitrogen for 30 min. This solution was stirred at 80 C
for 24 h. Pyridine was removed and EtOAc was added to dissolve the residue, which was
washed by 0.1 M HCl solution for 3 times, followed by a saturated NaHCO3 solution, brine,
dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated. The crude product was purified by
70

flash column chromatography with EtOAc to give 5.74 g product in 82 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.12–8.10 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.81–7.79 (m, 2H, Ar-H),

7.75–7.69 (m, 4H, Ar-H), 6.75 (br, 2 H, NH), 5.88 (s, 2 H, a-H), 4.57 (s, 2 H, b-H), 4.30–
4.26 (m, 2 H, e-H), 4.11–4.06 (m, 4 H, d-H, f-Ha), 4.01–3.97 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.86 (s, 2 H,
c-H), 3.67 (br, 2 H, k-Ha), 3.57 (m, 2 H, k-Hb), 3.44 (t, J3,4 = 4.0 Hz, 4 H, 4-H), 3.29–3.26
(m, 12 H, 1-H, 3-H, n-H), 1.59 (m, 8 H, l-H, m-H), 1.49, 1.42, 1.33, 1.31 (4 × s, 4 × 6 H, 8
× CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.48 (C-2), 147.86 (C-NO2), 133.60 (=C-H),

133.39 (=C-SO2), 132.63 (=C-H), 130.91 (=C-H), 124.99 (=C-H), 111.66 (C(CH3)2),
108.91 (C(CH3)2), 105.15 (C-a), 82.25 (C-b, C-c), 80.97 (C-d), 72.43 (C-e), 70.37 (C-k),
67.22 (C-f), 47.83 (C-1), 45.90 (C-n), 44.29 (C-3), 40.31 (C-4), 26.75 (C-l), 26.72 (C-m),
26.59 (CH3), 26.11 (CH3), 25.77 (CH3), 25.37 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2985, 2935, 1624, 1538, 1370, 1341, 1213, 1162, 1127, 1070, 1015;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1253.5494 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1253.4570 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound G-T-05

Compound G-T-04 (0.98 g, 1.0 equiv.), potassium carbonate (0.44 g, 4.0 equiv.), and G-T01 (0.72 g, 2.05 equiv.) were dissolved in DMF (8.0 mL, 0.1 M solution). This solution

71

was stirred at 80 C for 24 h. DMF was removed and DCM was added to dissolve the
residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product was purified
by flash column chromatography (hex:EtOAc = 1:1 to EtOAc:MeOH=30:1), giving 1.35 g
product in 91 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.02–7.99 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.70–7.68 (m, 4H, Ar-H),

7.63–7.61 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 5.87, 5.83 (d, Ja,b = 3.6 Hz, 4 H, a-H, a’-H), 4.55, 4.50 (d, Ja,b =
3.6 Hz, 4 H, b-H, b’-H), 4.31–4.20 (m, 4 H, e-H, e’-H), 4.12–3.94 (m, 12 H, d-H, d’-H, fH, f’-H), 3.84, 3,79 (d, Ja,b = 3.6 Hz, 4 H, c-H, c’-H), 3.64–3.36 (m, 20 H, k-H, k’-H, 1-H,
3-H, 4-H), 3.23–3.20 (m, 8 H, n-H, n’-H), 1.67–1.57 (m, 16 H, l-H, l’-H, m-H, m’-H), 1.49,
1.41, 1.32, 1.31 (4 × s, 8 × 6 H, 16 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.64 (C-2), 147.60 (C-NO2), 133.25 (=C-H),

132.87 (=C-SO2), 131.48 (=C-H), 130.09 (=C-H), 123.78 (=C-H), 111.24 (C(CH3)2),
108.44 (C(CH3)2), 108.42 (C(CH3)2), 104.83 (C-a, C-a’), 81.95, 81.89 (C-b, C-b’), 81.79,
81.71 (C-c, C-c’), 80.62, 80.61 (C-d, C-d’), 72.14 (C-e, C-e’), 69.88, 69.25 (C-k, C-k’),
66.73, 66.63 (C-f, C-f’), 47.65 (C-1), 47.24 (C-3), 46.69 (C-n), 46.02 (C-n’), 38.62 (C-4),
26.43 (CH3), 26.22 (C-l), 25.82 (CH3), 25.41 (C-l’),, 25.03 (CH3), 24.99 (CH3), 24.34 (Cm, C-m’);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2985, 2935, 1633, 1543, 1371, 1213, 1162, 1125, 1069, 1014;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1859.8846 M+H+ (Calculated: 1859.8209 M+H+).
Synthesis of compound G-T-06

72

Compound G-T-05 (16.1 g, 1.0 equiv.) was dissolved in DMF (90 mL, 0.1 M) and
potassium carbonate (5.98 g, 5.0 equiv.) was added. This solution was purged with nitrogen
for 30 min before adding PhSH (3.56 mL, 4.0 equiv.). The resulting solution was stirred at
room temperature overnight. DMF was removed and DCM added to dissolve the residue.
After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product was purified by flash
column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH:Et3N = 500:100:6), giving 10.0 g product
in 78 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.86 (d, Ja,b = 3.2 Hz, 4 H, a-H, a’-H), 4.54 (s, 4 H,

b-H, b’-H), 4.28–4.27 (m, 4 H, e-H, e’-H), 4.11–4.05 (m, 8 H, d-H, d’-H, f-Ha, f’-Ha), 4.00–
3.96 (m, 4 H, f-Hb, f’-Hb), 3.85 (s, 4 H, c-H, c’-H), 3.63–3.55 (m, 8 H, k-H, k’-H), 3.34–
3.23 (m, 16 H, n-H, n’-H, 1-H, N-H), 2.80 (s, 4 H, 3-H), 2.66 (s, 4 H, 4-H), 1.59 (s, 16 H,
l-H, l’-H, m-H, m’-H), 1.49, 1.42, 1.34, 1.32 (4 × s, 8 × 6 H, 16 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.06 (C-2), 111.41 (C(CH3)2), 111.37 (C(CH3)2),

108.60 (C(CH3)2), 108.55 (C(CH3)2), 104.87, 104.85 (C-a, C-a’), 82.09, 82.03 (C-b, C-b’),
81.81, 81.76 (C-c, C-c’), 80.72, 80.68 (C-d, C-d’), 72.14, 72.12 (C-e, C-e’), 69.92, 69.85
(C-k, C-k’), 66.88, 66.82 (C-f, C-f’), 48.82 (C-1), 48.69 (C-3), 47.70 (C-4), 46.01 (C-n’),
39.83 (C-n), 27.11, 26.58 (C-l, C-l’), 26.48 (CH3), 25.90 (CH3), 25.87, 25.45 (C-m, C-m’),

73

25.14 (CH3), 25.13 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2985, 2935, 1626, 1371, 1212, 1164, 1069, 1015;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1489.8448 M+H+ (Calculated: 1489.8644 M+H+).
Synthesis of poly(HDI-G-T)

Compound G-T-06 (0.994 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added to a dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for 3 times, anhydrous DMF (3.0 mL, 0.2 M) was added under
nitrogen, followed by HDI (0.113 mL, 1.0 equiv.). This solution was stirred at 60 C for 40
h before removing the DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM,
and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum
to yield 1.050 g product as a white powder in 95 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.85 (a-H, a’-H), 4.54 (b-H, b’-H), 4.27 (e-H, e’-H),

4.10–4.06 (d-H, d’-H, f-Ha, f’-Ha), 3.97 (f-Hb, f’-Hb), 3.85 (c-H, c’-H), 3.64–3.55 (k-H, k’H), 3.23 (n-H, n’-H, 1-H, 3-H, 4-H, 6-H, 11-H), 1.58 (l-H, l’-H, m-H, m’-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9H, 10-H), 1.49, 1.41, 1.33, 1.31 (CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.42 (C-2, C-5, C-12), 111.31 (C(CH3)2), 108.49

(C(CH3)2), 108.46 (C(CH3)2), 104.80 (C-a, C-a’), 81.96 (C-b, C-b’), 81.75 (C-c, C-c’),
80.64 (C-d, C-d’), 72.12, 72.05 (C-e, C-e’), 69.88. 69.79 (C-k, C-k’), 66.84, 66.75 (C-f, C74

f’), 46.96, 46.49, 46.05, 45.78 (C-n, C-n’, C-f, C-1, C-3, C-4, C-6, C-11), 29.79, 29.21 (Cl, C-l’, C-m, C-m’, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10), 26.44 (CH3), 25.85 (CH3), 25.09 (CH3), 25.06
(CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2987, 2936, 2252, 1625, 1530, 1373, 1164, 1073, 1018, 905, 723;
Synthesis of depro(HDI-G-T)

Poly(HDI-G-T) (0.67 g) was deprotected using an excess of an 80 % TFA/water solution.
The solvent was removed after 30 min. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount
of methanol, and precipitated into cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under
vacuum to yield a white powder. Yield = 0.53 g, 98 %.
1

H NMR (CD3OD, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.07 (s, 2 H, a-Hα, a’-Hα), 4.47 (s, 2 H, a-Hβ, a’-

Hβ), 3.80–3.16 (m, 56 H, b-H, c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, k-H, n-H, b’-H, c’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H,
k’-H, n’-H, 1-H, 3-H, 4-H, 6-H, 11-H), 1.59–1.32 (m, 24 H, l-H, m-H, l’-H, m’-H, 7-H, 8H, 9-H, 10-H);
13

C NMR (CD3OD, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 160.29 (C-2), 98.15, 93.98 (C-a, C-a’),

86.25,83.31 (C-b, C-b’), 77.85, 76.14 (C-d, C-d’), 73.65, 73.02 (C-c, C-c’), 71.45 (C-e, Ce’), 62.62 (C-k, C-k’), 41.82, 40.67 (C-3, C-4), 31.39, 28.28, 27.83, 26.11 (C-7, C-8, C-9,
C-10);
DEPT–135 (CD3OD, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 97.88, 93.70 (C-a, C-a’), 85.97, 83.03 (C-b, C-

75

b’), 77.57, 75.85 (C-d, C-d’), 73.38, 72.73 (C-c, C-c’), 71.16, 71.07 (C-e, C-e’), 73.28 (Cf, C-f’), 62.33 (C-k, C-k’), 41.40, 40.34 (C-3, C-4), 31.11, 27.97, 27.55, 25.85 (C-7, C-8,
C-9, C-10);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3312, 2929, 1602, 1539, 1370, 1115, 1074, 1031, 977;
Synthesis of sulf(HDI-G-T)

A solution of depro(HDI-G-T) (340 mg, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3.pyridine complex (790 mg,
20 equiv., 1.25 equiv. for each OH group) in pyridine (2.5 mL, 0.1 M) was heated at 100
C for 20 h. After the solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust
the pH to 8.0 and the polymer isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a brown
powder. Yield = 500 mg, 71 %.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 9.10–9.09 (m, 4 H, pyridinium), 8.68–8.65 (m, 2 H,

pyridinium), 8.19–8.17 (m, 4 H, pyridinium) 6.07–5.98 (m, 4 H, a-H, a’-H), 4.66–2.83 (m,
56 H, b-H, c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, k-H, n-H, b’-H, c’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, k’-H, n’-H, 1-H, 3H, 4-H, 6-H, 11-H), 1.60–1.32 (m, 24 H, l-H, m-H, l’-H, m’-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.55 (C-2), 148.58, 142.90, 128.19 (pyridinium),

94.84, 92.84 (C-a, C-a’), 80.48, 78.69 (C-b, C-b’), 77.37, 76.01 (C-d, C-d’), 75.42, 75.36
(C-c, C-c’), 74.86, 74.04 (C-e, C-e’), 69.81, 66.92 (C-k, C-k’), 47.57, 45.36, 40.66 (C-3,
C-4), 29.68, 26.57, 26.10, 24.12, 23.98 (C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10);

76

FT-IR: (cm-1) 3458, 2943, 1613, 1537, 1489, 1223, 1064, 984, 780.
Synthesis route for compound M-T-01

1.0 equiv. of 2,3:5,6-di-O-isopropylidene-α-D-mannofuranoside (15.6 g), synthesized
according to the reported procedure,32 was dissolved in DMSO (100 mL, 0.6 M). 50 %
NaOH solution (8.16 mL, 1.7 equiv.) was added into this solution with stirring, followed
by 1-bromo-4-chlorobutane (10.36 mL, 1.488 g/mL, 1.5 equiv.). This solution was stirred
at r.t. for 18 h before adding water to quench it. Ether was added to extract this solution
three times. The combined organic layer was washed by water, brine and dried over
anhydrous sodium sulfate. After concentration, the crude product was purified by column
chromatography with hex:EA=10:1, giving pure product 18 g in 86 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.83 (s, 1 H, a-H), 4.65–4.63 (m, 1 H, c-H), 4.44 (d,

Ja,b = 6.0 Hz, 1 H, b-H), 4.28–4.24 (m, 1 H, e-H), 3.98–3.95, 3.90–3.87 (m, 2 H, f-H), 3.78–
3.76 (m, 1 H, d-H), 3.56–3.50, 3.31–3.25 (m, 2 H, k-H), 3.44–3.41 (m, 2 H, l-H), 1.72–
1.67 (m, 2 H, m-H), 1.61–1.56 (m, 2 H, n-H), 1.32, 1.31, 1.24, 1.18 (4 × s, 4 × 3 H, 4 ×
CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 112.12 (C(CH3)2), 108.72 (C(CH3)2), 105.97 (C-a),

84.71 (C-b), 79.95 (C-c), 79.16 (C-d), 72.78 (C-e), 66.51 (C-k), 66.08 (C-f), 44.25 (C-n),
29.04 (C-l), 26.53 (C-m), 26.46 (CH3), 25.52 (CH3), 24.83 (CH3), 24.16 (CH3);

77

FT-IR: (cm-1) 2986, 2936, 2876, 1370, 1208, 1082, 1063, 1020;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 373.1277 M+Na+ (Calculated: 373.1394 M+Na+).

A mixture solution of compound pre-M-T-01 (18.0 g, 1.0 equiv.), NaI (11.54 g, 1.5 equiv.)
in acetone (300 mL, 0.17 M) was refluxed for 24 h. After removal the solvent, the crude
product was purified by column chromatography with hex:EA=10:1, giving the desired
product 21.0 g in 93 % yield, which is confirmed by the comparison of spectra with the
literature.40
Synthesis of compound M-T-02

A solution of N,N’-bis(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine (2.26 g, 1.0 equiv.), 4iodobutyl 2,3;5,6-di-O-isopropylidene-α-D-mannofuranoside (M-T-01, 5.10 g, 2.2 equiv.),
and potassium carbonate (2.90 g, 4.0 equiv.) in DMF (50 mL, 0.1 M solution) was stirred
at 80 C for 24 h. The DMF was removed and DCM added to dissolve the residue. After
filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexane:EtOAc = 1:1 to EtOAc), giving 5.5 g of the desired product in
99 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.99–7.97 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.74–7.72 (m, 4H, Ar-H),

7.66–7.64 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 4.95 (s, 2 H, a-H), 4.79–4.77 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.57 (d, Ja,b = 5.6

78

Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.42–4.37 (m, 2 H, e-H), 4.12–4.08, 4.04–4.01 (m, 4 H, f-H), 3.93–3.91 (m,
2 H, d-H), 3.66–3.61 (m, 2 H, k-Ha), 3.50 (s, 4 H, 1-H), 3.35–3.34 (m, 6 H, k-Hb, n-H),
1.65–1.63 (m, 4 H, l-H), 1.56–1.54 (m, 4 H, m-H), 1.46, 1.44, 1.37, 1.32 (4 × s, 4 × 6 H, 8
× CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 147.94 (C-NO2), 133.67 (=C-H), 132.50 (=C-SO2),

131.65 (=C-H), 130.35 (=C-H), 124.08 (=C-H), 112.31 (C(CH3)2), 108.96 (C(CH3)2),
106.10 (C-a), 84.83 (C-b), 80.06 (C-c), 79.33 (C-d), 73.00 (C-e), 66.69 (C-k), 66.33 (C-f),
48.90 (C-1), 46.93 (C-n), 26.74 (C-l), 26.13 (C-m), 25.72 (CH3), 25.10 (CH3), 25.02 (CH3),
24.33 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2986, 2936, 1543, 1370, 1160, 1081, 1061, 1020;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1081.4100 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1081.3610 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound M-T-03

Compound M-T-02 (4.20 g, 1.0 equiv.) was dissolved in DMF (40 mL, 0.1 M) and
potassium carbonate (2.74 g, 5.0 equiv.) was added. This solution was purged by nitrogen
for 30 min before adding PhSH (1.75 mL, 4.0 equiv.). The resulting solution was stirred at
room temperature overnight. DMF was removed and DCM was added to dissolve the
residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product was purified
by flash column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH:Et3N = 500:100:6), giving 2.35 g
product in 86 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.97 (s, 2 H, a-H), 4.79–4.77 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.57 (d,

79

Ja,b = 6.0 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.42–4.37 (m, 2 H, e-H), 4.13–4.09, 4.05–4.02 (m, 4 H, f-H), 3.93–
3.90 (m, 2 H, d-H), 3.65–3.63, 3.39–3.37 (m, 4 H, k-H), 2.98 (br, 2 H, NH), 2.82 (s, 4 H,
1-H), 2.67 (t, Jn,m = 6.4 Hz, 4 H, n-H), 1.64–1.54 (m, 8 H, l-H, m-H), 1.46, 1.38, 1.32 (4 ×
s, 4 × 6 H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 112.54 (C(CH3)2), 109.17 (C(CH3)2), 106.26 (C-a),

85.01 (C-b), 80.20 (C-c), 79.48 (C-d), 73.13 (C-e), 66.88 (C-k), 67.05 (C-f), 49.22 (C-n),
48.33 (C-1), 27.05 (C-l), 26.91 (C-m), 26.11 (CH3), 25.85 (CH3), 25.12 (CH3), 24.48 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2984, 2935, 1371, 1208, 1063, 1020;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 689.4052 M+H+ (Calculated: 689.4225 M+H+).
Synthesis of compound M-T-04

A mixture of compound M-T-03 (2.20 g, 1.0 equiv.), 4-dimethylaminopyridine (0.39 g, 1.0
equiv.), and N-(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-2-imidazolidone (2.17 g, 2.5 equiv.) in pyridine
(30 mL, 0.1 M) was purged with nitrogen for 30 min. This solution was stirred at 80 C for
24 h. Pyridine was removed and EtOAc was added to dissolve the residue, which was
washed by 0.1 M HCl solution for 3 times, followed by saturated NaHCO3 solution, brine,
dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated. The crude product was purified by
flash column chromatography with EtOAc to give 3.90 g product in 99 % yield.

80

1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.12–8.10 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.80–7.79 (m, 2H, Ar-H),

7.75–7.69 (m, 4H, Ar-H), 6.74 (br, 2 H, NH), 4.98 (s, 2 H, a-H), 4.80–4.78 (m, 2 H, c-H),
4.58 (d, Ja,b = 5.6 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.43–4.39 (m, 2 H, e-H), 4.15–4.09, 4.06–4.02 (m, 4 H, fH), 3.94–3.92 (m, 2 H, d-H), 3.67–3.65 (m, 2 H, k-Ha), 3.45–3.42 (m, 6 H, k-Hb, n-H),
3.29–3.25 (m, 12 H, 1-H, 3-H, 4-H), 1.62–1.57 (m, 8 H, l-H, m-H), 1.46, 1.45, 1.38, 1.32
(4 × s, 4 × 6 H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.41 (C-2), 147.93 (C-NO2), 133.67 (=C-H),

133.43 (=C-SO2), 132.67 (=C-H), 131.00 (=C-H), 125.01 (=C-H), 112.62 (C(CH3)2),
109.15 (C(CH3)2), 106.43 (C-a), 85.05 (C-b), 80.25 (C-c), 79.52 (C-d), 73.18 (C-e), 67.19
(C-k), 66.81 (C-f), 48.08 (C-1), 46.40 (C-n), 44.25 (C-3), 40.44 (C-4), 28.38 (C-l), 26.91
(C-m), 26.48 (CH3), 25.88 (CH3), 25.14 (CH3), 24.52 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2986, 2936, 1624, 1538, 1369, 1340, 1209, 1162, 1080, 1063;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1253.4579 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1253.4570 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound M-T-05

A solution of M-T-04 (3.9 g, 1.0 equiv.), potassium carbonate (1.75 g, 4.0 equiv.), and MT-01 (3.5 g, 2.5 equiv.) was dissolved in DMF (30 mL, 0.1 M solution). This solution was

81

stirred at 80 C for 24 h. The DMF was removed and DCM was added to dissolve the
residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product was purified
by flash column chromatography (hex:EtOAc = 1:1 to EtOAc:MeOH = 30:1), giving 5.0 g
product in 85 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.03–8.01 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.70–7.68 (m, 4H, Ar-H),

7.64–7.62 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 4.97, 5.89 (br, 2 H, NH), 4.89 (s, 4 H, a-H, a’-H), 4.79–4.75 (m,
4 H, c-H, c’-H), 4.57, 4.53 (d, Ja,b = 6.0 Hz, 4 H, b-H, b’-H), 4.42–4.36 (m, 4 H, e-H, e’H), 4.15–4.07, 4.05–4.36 (m, 8 H, f-H, f’-H), 3.93–3.85 (m, 4 H, d-H, d’-H), 3.66–3.36 (m,
20 H, k-H, k’-H, n-H, n’-H, 3-H), 3.30–3.20 (m, 8 H, 1-H, 4-H), 1.64–1.56 (m, 16 H, l-H,
l’-H, m-H, m’-H), 1.46, 1.45, 1.37, 1.32 (4 × s, 8 × 6 H, 16 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 157.64 (C-2), 147.62 (C-NO2), 133.13 (=C-H),

132.97 (=C-SO2), 131.42 (=C-H), 130.20 (=C-H), 123.77 (=C-H), 112.09 (C(CH3)2),
112.05 (C(CH3)2), 108.69 (C(CH3)2), 105.94, 105.82 (C-a, C-a’), 84.65, 84.61 (C-b, C-b’),
79.82 (C-c, C-c’), 79.12 (C-d, C-d’), 72.78, 72.75 (C-e, C-e’), 66.73, 66.46 (C-k, C-k’),
66.17, 66.43 (C-f, C-f’), 47.73 (C-n, C-n’), 47.15 (C-1), 46.67 (C-3), 38.60, (C-4), 26.52
(CH3), 26.21, 25.88 (C-l, C-l’), 25.51 (CH3), 24.79 (CH3), 24.39 (C-m, C-m’), 24.15 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2985, 2936, 1633, 1543, 1370, 1208, 1160, 1116, 1081, 1061, 1020;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1859.8433 M+H+ (Calculated: 1859.8209 M+H+).
Synthesis of compound M-T-06

82

Compound M-T-05 (4.9 g, 1.0 equiv.) was dissolved in DMF (26 mL, 0.1 M) and potassium
carbonate (1.82 g, 5.0 equiv.) was added. This solution was purged with nitrogen for 30
min before adding PhSH (1.08 mL, 4.0 equiv.). The resulting solution was stirred at room
temperature overnight. The DMF was removed and DCM added to dissolve the residue.
After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product was purified by flash
column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH:Et3N = 500:100:6), giving 3.5 g product
in 89 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.92 (br, 2H, NH), 4.96 (s, 4 H, a-H, a’-H), 4.78–

4.77 (m, 4 H, c-H, c’-H), 4.57 (d, Ja,b = 5.6 Hz, 4 H, b-H, b’-H), 4.42–4.38 (m, 4 H, e-H,
e’-H), 4.13–4.09, 4.04–4.01 (m, 8 H, f-H, f’-H), 3.92–3.90 (m, 4 H, d-H, d’-H), 3.65–3.60
(m, 4 H, k-Ha, k’-Ha), 3.40–3.22 (m, 16 H, n-H, n’-H, k-Hb, k’-Hb, 1-H), 2.78–2.76, 2.65–
2.61 (m, 8 H, 3-H, 4-H), 1.57–1.52 (m, 16 H, l-H, l’-H, m-H, m’-H), 1.46, 1.45, 1.38, 1.32
(4 × s, 8 × 6 H, 16 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 157.75 (C-2), 112.00 (C(CH3)2), 111.93 (C(CH3)2),

108.53 (C(CH3)2), 105.79, 105.73 (C-a, C-a’), 84.52 (C-b, C-b’), 79.74, 79.69 (C-c, C-c’),
79.00 (C-d, C-d’), 72.61 (C-e, C-e’), 66.63, 66.53 (C-k, C-k’), 66.35, 66.30 (C-f, C-f’),
48.60 (C-1), 48.55 (C-3), 47.65 (C-4), 46.01 (C-n’), 39.88 (C-n), 26.67, 26.25 (C-l, C-l’),
83

26.42 (CH3), 26.13, 25.46 (C-m, C-m’), 25.38 (CH3), 24.67 (CH3), 24.04 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2984, 2935, 1627, 1370, 1207, 1160, 1062, 1019;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1489.8516 M+H+ (Calculated: 1489.8644 M+H+).
Synthesis of poly(HDI-M-T)

Compound M-T-06 (0.772 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added to a dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for 3 times, anhydrous DMF (2.5 mL, 0.17 M) was added under
nitrogen, followed by HDI (0.080 mL, 1.0 equiv.). This solution was stirred at 60 C for 40
h before removing the DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM,
and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum
to yield 0.77 g product as a white powder in 90 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 6.82 (NH) 4.96 (a-H, a’-H), 4.78 (c-H, c’-H), 4.57–

4.56 (b-H, b’-H), 4.39 (e-H, e’-H), 4.10–4.03 (f-H, f’-H), 3.91 (d-H, d’-H), 3.64 (k-Ha, k’Ha), 3.38–3.22 (n-H, n’-H, k-Hb, k’-Hb, 1-H, 3-H, 4-H, 6-H, 11-H), 1.56 (l-H, l’-H, m-H,
m’-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H), 1.46, 1.38, 1.32 (CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.65 (C-2), 112.43 (C(CH3)2), 109.00 (C(CH3)2),

106.18 (C-a, C-a’), 84.89 (C-b, C-b’), 80.12 (C-c, C-c’), 79.37 (C-d, C-d’), 73.00 (C-e, Ce’), 66.98, 66.93 (C-k, C-k’), 66.71 (C-f, C-f’), 47.35 (C-1), 46.75 (C-n, C-n’), 46.40, 40.26

84

(C-3, C-4, C-6, C-11), 30.09, 29.76, 29.51 (C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10), 26.77 (CH3), 26.53 (C-l,
C-l’), 26.46 (C-m, C-m’), 25.74 (CH3), 25.02 (CH3), 25.00, 24.39 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2934, 1626, 1529, 1370, 1208, 1116, 1080, 1062, 846;
Synthesis of depro(HDI-M-T)

Poly(HDI-M-T) (0.50 g) was deprotected using an excess of an 80 % TFA/water solution.
The solvent was removed after 30 min. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount
of methanol, and precipitated into cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under
vacuum to yield a white powder 0.40 g. Yield = 98 %.
1

H NMR (CD3OD, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.54 (s, 4 H, a-H, a’-H), 4.28–2.99 (m, 56 H, b-H,

c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, k-H, n-H, b’-H, c’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, k’-H, n’-H, 1-H, 3-H, 4-H, 6-H,
11-H), 1.53–1.18 (m, 24 H, l-H, m-H, l’-H, m’-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H);
13

C NMR (CD3OD, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 160.43 (C-2), 109.35, 107.43, 95.90 (C-a, C-a’),

86.35, 81.63, 80.73 (C-b, C-b’), 80.51, 78.49, 73.99 (C-c, C-c’), 73.02, 72.82 (C-d, C-d’),
70.76, 69.43, 68.18 (C-e, C-e’), 68.78, 65.34, 64.92 (C-f, C-f’), 63.00, 62.83 (C-k, C-k’),
31.50, 30.66, 27.94, 27.88, 27.69, 26.56 (C-l, C-m, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10);
DEPT–135 (CD3OD, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 109.05, 107.07, 95.61 (C-a, C-a’), 86.06, 81.34,
80.45 (C-b, C-b’), 80.20, 78.22, 73.70 (C-c, C-c’), 72.73, 72.52, 72.07 (C-d, C-d’), 71.23,

85

70.46, 68.48 (C-e, C-e’), 69.13, 67.88, 65.05, 64.63 (C-f, C-f’), 62.70, 62.54 (C-k, C-k’),
48.57, 48.17, 47.48, 46.68, 41.69, 40.54 (C-n, C-1, C-3, C-4, C-6, C-11), 31.23, 30.36,
27.61, 27.40, 26.27, 25.97 (C-l, C-m, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3328, 2933, 1608, 1539, 1410, 1140, 1061, 1015, 967;
Synthesis of sulf(HDI-M-T)

A solution of depro(HDI-M-T) (290 mg, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (649 mg,
20 equiv., 1.25 equiv. for each OH group) in pyridine (2.0 mL, 0.1 M) was heated at 100
C for 20 h. After the solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust
the pH to 8.0 and the polymer isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a brown
powder. Yield = 430 mg, 72 %.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.40–5.15 (m, 12 H, a-H, a’-H, b-H, c-H, b’-H, c’-H),

4.58–3.08 (m, 48 H, d-H, e-H, f-H, k-H, n-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, k’-H, n’-H, 1-H, 3-H, 4-H,
6-H, 11-H), 1.89–1.56 (m, 24 H, l-H, m-H, l’-H, m’-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.57 (C-2), 106.07, 104.96, 104.06, 95.15 (C-a, C-

a’), 84.42, 79.30 (C-b, C-b’), 78.27, 77.10, 76.71 (C-c, C-c’), 74.98, 73.91, 73.18 (C-d, Cd’), 71.07, 70.99, 69.04 (C-e, C-e’), 68.46, 66.77, 66.63 (C-f, C-f’), 47.56, 43.33, 41.54,
39.64 (C-3, C-4, C-6, C-11), 26.02, 25.99, 25.80, 22.66 (C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10);

86

FT-IR: (cm-1) 3458, 2942, 1620, 1546, 1219, 1047, 1012, 957, 784.
Synthesis of compound L-D-0241
Catalytic iodine (0.50 g, 0.067 equiv.) was added into a suspension solution of lactose
(10.00 g, 1.0 equiv.) and 50 mL acetic anhydride. This solution was stirred at room
temperature for 15 min before adding an excess of saturated sodium thiosulfate solution to
quench the reaction. Dichloromethane (DCM) was added to extract the solution three times.
Saturated NaHCO3 solution was added into the organic layer until no bubbles formed. The
organic layer was separated, washed by brine and concentrated to give the desired product
as a white solid (19.60 g, 99 %). The structure was confirmed against that reported in the
literature.42
Synthesis of compound L-D-0343
Benzyl amine (6.32 g, 2.0 equiv.) was added to a solution of L-D-02 (20.00 g, 1.0 equiv.)
in 200 mL THF. This solution was stirred at room temperature for 20 h before removing
the solvent. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and this solution was washed with 1.0
M HCl for three times, followed by saturated NaHCO3, brine, and dried over anhydrous
sodium sulfate. After concentration, the crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1 to 1:2), giving the desired product as white solid
(18.00 g, 96 %). This structure was confirmed with the reported literature.43
Synthesis of compound L-D-0443
L-D-03 (8.97 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After
evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times, 50 mL anhydrous DCM was injected,
followed by trichloroacetonitrile (10.17 g, 5.0 equiv.). This solution was cooled using an
ice bath for 5 min before adding catalytic amount of DBU (0.21 g, 0.1 equiv.). The solution

87

was warmed to room temperature slowly within 3 h. Solvent was removed and the crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 3:2), giving
product as a light yellow solid 9.80 g (89 %). This structure was confirmed with the
reported literature.43
Synthesis of compound L-D-0543b
L-D-04 (23.78 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After
evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times, 150 mL anhydrous DCM was
injected, followed by 2-bromethanol (11.42 g, 3.0 equiv.). This solution was cooled with
dry ice/acetone for 30 min before adding boron trifluoride diethyl etherate (3.84 mL, about
48 % BF3 basis, 1.0 equiv.). Then, it was stirred and warmed to room temperature overnight.
Excess triethylamine was added to quench the reaction and DCM was added to dilute the
solution. Then the solution was washed with 1.0 M HCl solution three times, saturated
NaHCO3, and brine, then dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated. The crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 3:2), giving light
yellow product 14.68 g (65 %). This structure was confirmed with the reported literature.43b
Synthesis of compound L-D-0643b
L-D-05 (12.50 g, 1.0 equiv.) and NaI (4.28 g, 1.7 equiv.) were dissolved in 150 mL dry
acetone. This solution was refluxed for 3 h before removing the solvent. The crude product
was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1), giving a light
yellow product 12.90 g (97 %). This structure was confirmed with the reported literature.43b
Synthesis of compound L-D-07

88

L-D-06 (12.90 g, 3.0 equiv.), N,N’-bis(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine (2.34
g, 1.0 equiv.), and potassium carbonate (3.01 g, 4.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried
flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen three times, anhydrous DMF (50 mL)
was injected under nitrogen protection. This solution was stirred at 50 C for 24 h before
removing DMF. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and the solution was filtered
through Celite and concentrated. The crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1 to EtOAc), giving a light yellow product 9.45 g
(99 %).
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.02–8.00 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.76–7.74 (m, 4H, Ar-H),

7.70–7.68 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 5.35 (d, J = 2.8 Hz, 2 H, d-H), 5.16–5.08 (m, 4 H, b-H, c’-H),
5.00–4.96 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.84 (t, J = 8.8 Hz, 2 H, b’-H), 4.55–4.47 (m, 6 H, a-H, a’-H, f’Ha), 4.15–4.04 (m, 6 H, f-H, g-Ha), 3.93–3.81 (m, 6 H, e-H, d’-H, f’-Hb), 3.78–3.72 (m, 2
H, g-Hb), 3.64–3.45 (m, 10 H, e’-H, h-H, 1-H), 2.15, 2.10, 2.05, 2.03, 2.01, 1.97 (6 × s, 42
H, 14 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.86 (C=O), 170.20 (C=O), 170.11 (C=O), 169.95

(C=O), 169.80 (C=O), 169.46 (C=O), 168.95 (C=O), 147.99 (C-NO2), 133.74 (=C-H),
132.45 (=C-SO2), 132.07 (=C-H), 130.22 (=C-H), 124.26 (=C-H), 100.76 (C-a), 100.35
(C-a’), 75.88 (C-d), 72.72 (C-b), 72.58 (C-c’), 71.18 (C-c), 70.78 (C-b’), 70.34 (C-e’),
68.91 (C-e), 68.04 (C-d’), 66.55 (C-f), 61.71 (C-f’), 60.13 (C-g), 48.61 (C-h), 47.64 (C-1),
20.80 (CH3), 20.58 (CH3), 20.39 (CH3), 20.29 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1740, 1544, 1367, 1213, 1162, 1040;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1777.4227 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1777.4268 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound L-D-08

89

L-D-07 (0.36 g, 1.0 equiv.) and potassium carbonate (0.14 g, 5.0 equiv.) in 4 mL anhydrous
DMF was degassed with nitrogen before adding thiophenol (0.090 g, 4.0 equiv.). This
solution was stirred at room temperature overnight. DMF was removed and DCM was
added to dissolve the residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH:Et3N =
400:100:5), giving 0.25 g (88 %) of a white solid foam.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.35 (d, J = 2.8 Hz, 2 H, d-H), 5.19 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2

H, c’-H), 5.10 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.98–4.94 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.88 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2 H,
b’-H), 4.52–4.48 (m, 6 H, a-H, a’-H, f’-Ha), 4.16–4.05 (m, 6 H, f-H, g-Ha), 3.94–3.90 (m,
4 H, e-H, f’-Hb), 3.80 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2 H, d’-H), 3.70–3.60 (m, 4 H, g-Hb, e’-H), 2.83–2.77
(m, 4 H, h-H), 2.73 (s, 4 H, 1-H), 2.16, 2.13, 2.06, 2.05, 1.97 (5 × s, 42 H, 14 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.34 (C=O), 170.27 (C=O), 170.09 (C=O), 169.99

(C=O), 169.67 (C=O), 169.02 (C=O), 100.95 (C-a), 100.68 (C-a’), 76.10 (C-d), 72.69 (Cb), 71.59 (C-c’), 70.90 (C-c), 70.56 (C-b’), 69.37 (C-e’), 69.03 (C-e), 66.57 (C-d’), 61.93
(C-f), 60.73 (C-f’), 53.50 (C-g), 48.59 (C-h), 48.35 (C-1), 20.84 (CH3), 20.74 (CH3), 20.68
(CH3), 20.57 (CH3), 20.45 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1739, 1367, 1212, 1168, 1036;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1385.4823 M+H+ (Calculated: 1385.4882 M+H+).
Synthesis of poly(HDI-L-D)

90

L-D-08 (2.678 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for three times, 13 mL anhydrous DMF was injected followed by
HDI (0.341 g, 1.05 equiv.). This solution was stirred at 60 C for 40 h before removing the
DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM, and precipitated in cold
ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum to yield 2.850 g product as a
white powder in 93 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.36 (s, 2 H, d-H), 5.18 (m, 2 H, c’-H), 5.09 (t, J =

8.0 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 5.00 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.86 (m, 2 H, b’-H), 4.51 (m, 6 H, a-H, a’-H, f’-Ha),
4.11 (m, 6 H, f-H, g-Ha), 3.95 (m, 4 H, e-H, f’-Hb), 3.81 (m, 2 H, d’-H), 3.65 (m, 4 H, gHb, e’-H), 3.18 (m, 12 H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 2.15, 2.12, 2.06, 2.05, 2.02, 1.96 (6 × s, 42
H, 14 × CH3), 1.51–1.35 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.06 (CH3C=O), 169.90 (CH3C=O), 169.76

(CH3C=O), 169.55 (CH3C=O), 169.41 (CH3C=O), 168.84 (CH3C=O), 158.69 (C-2, C-9),
100.69 (C-a), 100.42 (C-a’), 75.94 (C-d), 72.52 (C-b), 71.24 (C-c’), 70.69 (C-c), 70.34 (Cb’), 69.57 (C-e’), 68.89 (C-e), 66.45 (C-d’), 61.69 (C-f), 60.59 (C-f’), 53.43 (C-g), 48.32
91

(C-h), 47.04 (C-1), 46.75 (C-3), 45.69 (C-8), 40.51 (C-4), 29.09 (C-7), 26.75 (C-5), 26.45
(C-6), 20.54 (CH3), 20.37 (CH3), 20.25 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1740, 1631, 1540, 1367, 1212, 1170, 1038;
Synthesis of depro(HDI-L-D)

In a flame-dried flask, poly(HDI-L-D) (2.85 g) was dissolved in 35 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding a catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution (25 % by wt).
This solution was stirred at room temperature for 3 h during which time a precipitate
formed. The solution was poured into a beaker. MeOH was used to wash the precipitate
three times and combined with the original solution. The precipitate was dried over high
vacuum to yield 1.20 g product (66 %). The remaining solution was added to Dowex
50WX8 hydrogen form resin and the pH adjusted to approximately 6.0. After filtration to
remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the solvent was removed to yield 0.60 g (33 %) of white
product. The two products were then combined (1.20 g + 0.60 g and overall 99 % yield).
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.42 (m, 4 H, d-H, c’-H), 3.91–3.10 (m, 40 H, a-H, b-

92

H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 1.45–1.30 (m, 8
H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 102.87 (C-a), 102.41 (C-a’), 78.34 (C-d), 75.29 (Cb), 74.69 (C-c’), 74.36 (C-c), 72.79 (C-b’), 72.45 (C-e’), 70.87 (C-e), 68.46 (C-d’), 68.27
(C-g), 60.95 (C-f), 60.02 (C-f’), 47.53 (C-h), 45.86 (C-1), 40.44 (C-3), 39.80 (C-8), 29.40
(C-4), 29.24 (C-7), 25.93 (C-5), 25.88 (C-6);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.71 (C-2, C-9), 102.86 (C-a), 102.39 (C-a’), 78.34

(C-d), 75.27 (C-b), 74.68 (C-c’), 74.35 (C-c), 72.78 (C-b’), 72.44 (C-e’), 70.85 (C-e), 68.44
(C-d’), 68.26 (C-g), 60.93 (C-f), 60.02 (C-f’), 47.57 (C-h), 45.81 (C-1), 40.41 (C-3), 39.80
(C-8), 29.38 (C-4), 29.29 (C-7), 25.86(C-5, C-6);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3311, 2927, 1607, 1548, 1020;
Synthesis of sulf(HDI-L-D)

Depro(HDI-L-D) (0.98 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (5.20 g, 33.3 equiv.) was
added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times,

93

30 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. Then this solution was heated at 90 C for 16 h.
After the solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to
8.0 and the polymer was isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white powder.
Yield = 2.20 g, 92 %.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.23 (s, 2 H, d-H), 5.08–4.92 (m, 4 H, c’-H, b-H),

4.69–3.17 (m, 38 H, a-H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H, 3-H,
8-H), 1.62–1.46 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.79, 159.65 (C-2, C-9), 100.82, 100.55 (C-a),

100.31, 99.91 (C-a’), 77.76 (C-d), 77.50 (C-b), 77.07 (C-c’), 75.62 (C-c), 75.37 (C-b’),
75.03 (C-e’), 74.93 (C-e), 73.08 (C-d’), 71.70 (C-g), 68.04 (C-f), 66.34 (C-f’), 47.22, 46.22,
45.41 (C-h, C-1), 40.59, 39.60 (C-3, C-8), 29.50, 29.34, 29.08 (C-4, C-7), 26.52, 25.97,
25.43, 25.26 (C-5, C-6);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3479, 1626, 1543, 1225, 1004, 930, 800.
Synthesis of compound GA-D-02
In situ generation of TfN3 solution44
DCM (72 mL) was added to a solution of NaN3 (17.88 g, 274 mmol) in 44 mL water. The
solution was cooled in an ice bath for 5 min before adding Tf2O (9.36 mL, 55.80 mmol)
under vigorous stirring within 5 min. Then it was stirred in an ice bath for 2 h. The organic
phase was separated and the aqueous phase twice extracted using DCM. The combined
organic phases were washed by saturated NaHCO3 solution. The organic phase was
concentrated to 50 mL and stored in ice bath for the next reaction.
Preparation of 2-azido-2-deoxy-D-glucose
D-(+)-glucosamine hydrochloride (GA-D-01, 6.0 g, 27.8 mmol), K2CO3 (5.76 g, 41.7

94

mmol) and CuSO4·5H2O (68 mg, 0.27 mmol) was dissolved in 90 mL water, followed by
adding 180 mL methanol. This solution was cooled with ice bath for 10 min before adding
the freshly made TfN3 solution. Additional methanol was added into the solution to make
it homogeneous. Then it was warmed up slowly and stirred overnight. The solvent was
removed and the crude product purified by flash column chromatography
(EtOAc:MeOH=5:1), giving a light yellow syrup, which was decolorized by refluxing in
methanol with activated charcoal. After filtration and concentration, 2-azido-2-deoxy-Dglucose was obtained as white solid, which was directly used in the acetylation.
Acetylation of 2-azido-2-deoxy-D-glucose45
To an ice-bath cooled solution of 2-azido-2-deoxy-D-glucose in 25 mL acetonitrile was
added a solution of TsOH·H2O (0.90 g) in 40 mL acetic anhydride. This solution was
warmed up and stirred overnight. Water and DCM was added to dilute the solution,
followed by Na2CO3 until no bubbles were seen to evolve from the solution. The organic
layer was separated, washed by brine, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and
concentrated. Flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 2:1) was used to purify the
crude product, giving the desired product in 8.4 g yield (81 % for two steps). The structure
was confirmed using reported literature.46
Synthesis of compound GA-D-0347
Benzyl amine (5.12 mL, 5.02 g, 1.25 equiv.) was added to a solution of GA-D-02 (14.0 g,
1.0 equiv.) in 100 mL THF. The solution was stirred at r.t. for 24 h before removing the
solvent. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and this solution was washed three times
with 1.0 M HCl, followed by saturated NaHCO3 and brine, and dried over anhydrous
sodium sulfate. After concentration, the crude product was purified by flash column

95

chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 2:1), giving product 11.2 g (90 %). The structure was
confirmed with reported literature.46c
Synthesis of compound GA-D-0443b
GA-D-03 (7.0 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After
evacuating and refilling the flask three times with nitrogen, 80 mL of anhydrous DCM was
injected, followed by trichloroacetonitrile (10.59 mL, 15.25 g, 5.0 equiv.). The solution
was cooled in an ice bath for 10 min before adding DBU (0.316 mL, 0.322 g, 0.1 equiv.).
Then the reaction was slowly warmed up to r.t. Solvent was removed and the crude product
purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 2.5:1), giving 7.5 g (75 %)
product. The structure was confirmed using reported literature.46c
Synthesis of compound GA-D-0543b

GA-D-04 (14.5 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After
evacuating and refilling the flask three times with nitrogen, 150 mL anhydrous DCM was
injected, followed by 2-bromethanol (6.48 mL, 11.43 g, 3.0 equiv.). This solution was
cooled with dry ice/acetone for 30 min before adding boron trifluoride diethyl etherate
(3.84 mL, about 48 % BF3 basis, 1.0 equiv.). The reaction was stirred and warmed up to r.t.
before excess triethyl amine was added to quench the reaction. DCM was added to dilute
the solution, then it was washed three times using 1.0 M HCl, saturated NaHCO3, and brine,
and dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated. The crude product was purified
by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 2.5:1), giving 13 g (97 %) product.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.01–4.98 (m, 2 H, c-H, d-H), 4.46 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1
96

H, a-H), 4.29–4.25 (m, 1 H, f-Ha), 4.21–4.17 (m, 1 H, g-Ha), 4.14–4.10 (m, 1 H, e-H), 3.95–
3.91 (m, 1 H, f-Hb), 3.68–3.66 (m, 1 H, b-H), 3.56–3.51 (m, 3 H, g-Hb, h-H), 2.09, 2.02 (3
× s, 9 H, 3 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.62 (C=O), 169.98 (C=O), 169.61 (C=O), 102.18

(C-a), 72.31 (C-c), 71.91 (C-d), 70.16 (C-e), 68.29 (C-g), 63.63 (C-f), 61.82 (C-b), 29.20
(C-h), 20.74 (CH3), 20.69 (CH3), 20.59 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2110, 1743, 1365, 1211, 1158, 1029;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 460.0291 M+Na+ (Calculated: 460.0331 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound GA-D-06

NaI (15.6 g, 1.9 equiv.) was added to GA-D-05 (24.0 g, 1.0 equiv.) dissolved in 200 mL
dry acetone. The solution was refluxed for 2.5 h before removing the solvent. The crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 2:1), giving 25.4
g (96 %) product.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.07–4.97 (m, 2 H, c-H, d-H), 4.46 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1

H, a-H), 4.31–4.27 (m, 1 H, f-Ha), 4.19–4.11 (m, 2 H, g-Ha, e-H), 3.96–3.89 (m, 1 H, f-Hb),
3.68 (m, 1 H, b-H), 3.55–3.51 (m, 1 H, g-Hb), 3.37–3.30 (m, 2 H, h-H), 2.11, 2.04 (3 × s, 9
H, 3 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.74 (C=O), 170.10 (C=O), 169.74 (C=O), 102.07

(C-a), 72.48 (C-c), 72.07 (C-d), 71.21 (C-e), 68.43 (C-g), 63.81 (C-f), 61.96 (C-b), 20.89
(CH3), 20.83 (CH3), 20.72 (CH3), 1.19 (C-h);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2109, 1743, 1364, 1210, 1156, 1029;
97

MS (TOF MS ESI): 508.0126 M+Na+ (Calculated: 508.0193 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound GA-D-07

GA-D-06 (25.4 g, 2.8 equiv.), N,N’-bis(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine (8.05
g, 1.0 equiv.), and potassium carbonate (10.34 g, 4.0 equiv.) were mixed in a flame-dried
flask. After evacuating and refilling the flask three times with nitrogen, anhydrous DMF
(150 mL) was injected under nitrogen. This solution was stirred at 50 C for 20 h before
removing the DMF. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and the solution filtered
through Celite and concentrated. The crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1 to EtOAc), giving 15.87 g (74 %) product.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.99–7.97 (m, 2 H, Ar-H), 7.72–7.69 (m, 4 H, Ar-

H), 7.66–7.63 (m, 2 H, Ar-H), 4.98–4.90 (m, 4 H, c-H, d-H), 4.37 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H, aH), 4.25–4.18 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.10–3.97 (m, 4 H, g-Ha, e-H), 3.84–3.82 (m, 2 H, f-Hb),
3.68–3.33 (m, 12 H, b-H, g-Hb, h-H, 1-H), 2.04, 2.01, 1.97 (3 × s, 18 H, 6 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.56 (C=O), 169.86 (C=O), 169.57 (C=O), 148.13

(C-NO2), 133.95 (=C-H), 132.43 (=C-SO2), 132.07 (=C-H), 130.49 (=C-H), 124.41 (=CH), 101.89 (C-a), 72.53 (C-c), 71.81 (C-d), 68.73 (C-e), 68.23 (C-g), 63.17 (C-f), 61.72 (Cb), 48.73 (C-h), 47.88 (C-1), 20.66 (CH3), 20.62 (CH3), 20.51 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2110, 1740, 1541, 1363, 1221, 1160, 1033;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1167.2407 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1167.2495 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound GA-D-08

98

GA-D-07 (1.5 g, 1.0 equiv.) and potassium carbonate (0.905 g, 5.0 equiv.) in 10 mL
anhydrous DMF were degassed with nitrogen. PhSH (0.538 mL, 0.577 g, 4.0 equiv.) was
injected and the reaction stirred at r.t. overnight. DMF was removed and DCM added to
dissolve the residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product
was purified by flash column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH:Et3N = 400:100:5),
giving 0.65 g (64 %) product.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.05–4.99 (m, 4 H, c-H, d-H), 4.46 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2

H, a-H), 4.29–4.25 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.15–4.06 (m, 4 H, g-Ha, e-H), 3.81 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.70
(m, 1 H, b-H), 3.55–3.51 (m, 1 H, g-Hb), 3.89–3.32 (br, 2 H, NH), 2.99–2.89 (m, 4 H, hH), 2.85 (s, 4 H, 1-H), 2.09, 2.05, 2.02 (3 × s, 18 H, 6 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.01 (C=O), 169.32 (C=O), 169.08 (C=O), 101.53

(C-a), 71.88 (C-c), 71.28 (C-d), 68.95 (C-e), 67.94 (C-g), 63.20 (C-f), 61.41 (C-b), 48.13
(C-h), 47.75 (C-1), 20.24 (CH3), 20.16 (CH3), 20.06 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2110, 1741, 1366, 1217, 1030;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 775.3101 M+H+ (Calculated: 775.3110 M+H+).
Synthesis of poly(HDI-GA-D)

99

GA-D-08 (2.140 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling the flask three times with nitrogen, 15 mL anhydrous DMF was injected under
nitrogen protection, followed by HDI (0.466 mL, 0.488 g, 1.05 equiv.). The solution was
stirred at 60 C for 40 h before removing DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum
amount of DCM, and precipitated from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed
under vacuum to yield 2.53 g product as a white powder in 94 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.82 (br, 2 H, NH), 5.00 (m, 4 H, c-H, d-H), 4.45–

4.41 (m, 2 H, a-H), 4.30–4.27 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.11–4.00 (m, 4 H, g-Ha, e-H), 3.76–3.70 (m,
4 H, f-Hb, b-H), 3.48–3.18 (m, 14 H, g-Hb, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 2.09, 2.02 (2 × s, 18 H, 6
× CH3), 1.53–1.40 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.23 (CH3C=O), 169.57 (CH3C=O), 169.32

(CH3C=O), 158.36 (C-2, C-9), 101.75 (C-a), 72.17 (C-c), 71.59 (C-d), 69.81 (C-e), 68.02
(C-g), 63.42 (C-f), 61.48 (C-b), 48.15 (C-h), 46.85 (C-1), 40.56 (C-3, C-8), 29.79 (C-4, C7), 26.52, 26.25 (C-5, C-6), 20.43 (CH3), 20.38 (CH3), 20.28 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2111, 1746, 1627, 1540, 1367, 1224, 1047;
Synthesis of depro(HDI-GA-D)-NH2

100

To a solution of poly(HDI-GA-D) (0.355 g, 1.0 equiv.) in 8 mL methanol was added Pd/C
(0.18 g, 10 % by wt). This solution was stirred for 7 days at 60 psi. After filtration through
Celite and concentration, the reduced product was obtained in 98 % yield (0.33 g).
1

H NMR (CD3OD, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.87 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.48–3.39 (m, 20 H, a-H, d-H,

f-H, g-H, e-H, b-H, h-H), 3.28–2.71 (m, 8 H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 2.08–2.01 (m, 10 H, 6 × CH3),
1.52–1.35 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
DEPT-135 (CD3OD, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 103.08, 102.35 (C-a), 74.58 (C-c), 73.09, 72.25
(C-d), 71.47, 70.85 (C-e), 69.32 (C-g), 63.66, 62.68 (C-f), 57.35, 57.11 (C-b), 40.86 (C-h,
C-1, C-3, C-8), 30.41 (C-4, C-7), 26.92 (C-5, C-6), 20.08 (CH3);
13

C NMR (CD3OD, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 173.35 (CH3C=O), 172.59 (CH3C=O), 172.28

(CH3C=O), 171.97 (CH3C=O), 160.56, 160.39 (C-2, C-9), 103.94, 103.21 (C-a), 75.63,
75.43 (C-c), 73.98, 73.10 (C-d), 72.32, 71.71 (C-e), 70.04 (C-g), 64.53, 63.55 (C-f), 58.22,
57.97 (C-b), 41.71 (C-h, C-1, C-3, C-8), 31.24 (C-4, C-7), 27.77 (C-5, C-6), 20.94 (CH3),
20.60 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3288, 2930, 1736, 1659, 1621, 1538, 1367, 1241, 1023.
Synthesis of depro(HDI-GA-D)

101

In a flame-dried flask, depro(HDI-GA-D)-NH2 (0.30 g) was dissolved in 5 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at r.t. for 2 h. Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the solvent
to adjust the pH to approx. 6.0. After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the
solvent was removed to get product 0.20 g (92 %).
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.38 (m, 2 H, c-H), 3.94–2.62 (m, 28 H, a-H, b-H, d-

H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 1.46–1.40 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 102.85 (C-a), 76.03 (C-c), 74.95 (C-d), 69.78 (C-e),
68.33 (C-g), 60.74 (C-f), 56.40 (C-b), 40.41 (C-h, C-1, C-3, C-8), 29.48 (C-4, C-7), 25.94
(C-5, C-6);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.69 (C-2, C-9), 102.88 (C-a), 76.06 (C-c), 74.99

(C-d), 69.83 (C-e), 68.35 (C-g), 60.78 (C-f), 56.44 (C-b), 40.45 (C-h, C-1, C-3, C-8), 29.51
(C-4, C-7), 25.98 (C-5, C-6);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3291, 2926, 1609, 1538, 1406, 1371, 1257, 1021;
Synthesis of sulf(HDI-GA-D)

102

Depro(HDI-GA-D) (0.65 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (4.95 g, 32.0 equiv.)
were added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling the flask three times
with nitrogen 35 mL of anhydrous pyridine was injected. The reaction was heated to 90 C
for 24 h. After the solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust
the pH to approx. 8.0 and the polymer isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give
a light yellow powder. Yield = 1.20 g, 83 %.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.60–2.82 (m, 30 H, a-H, b-H, c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, g-

H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 1.54–1.39 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.72 (C-2, C-9), 100.74 (C-a), 78.52, 78.25 (C-c),

73.97 (C-d), 72.56 (C-e), 68.87 (C-g), 67.14 (C-f), 55.44, 54.34 (C-b), 47.31, 45.48, 40.58
(C-h, C-1, C-3, C-8), 29.51 (C-4, C-7), 26.05 (C-5, C-6);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3404, 2931, 1622, 1541, 1223, 1009, 800, 575.
Synthesis of compound G-D-0241
Iodine (2.5 g, 0.035 equiv.) was added into a solution of glucose (50 g, 1.0 equiv.) in 200
mL of acetic anhydride. This solution was stirred at r.t. for 30 min before adding an excess
sodium thiosulfate solution to quench the reaction. DCM was added three times to extract
the product. Saturated NaHCO3 solution was added into the organic layer until no bubbles

103

evolved. The organic layer was separated, washed by brine and concentrated to give the
desired product 107 g (99 %). This structure was confirmed with reported literature.48
Synthesis of compound G-D-0349
Benzyl amine (12.80 mL, 12.56 g, 1.5 equiv.) was added to a solution of G-D-02 (30.5 g,
1.0 equiv.) in 130 mL of THF. This solution was stirred at r.t. for 21 h before removing the
solvent. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and the solution washed with 1.0 M HCl
three times, followed by saturated NaHCO3, and brine before being dried over anhydrous
sodium sulfate. After concentration, the crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 3:2), giving 26.0 g (96 %) product. The structure was
confirmed with reported literature.49
Synthesis of compound G-D-0449a, 49c
G-D-03 (34.6 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After
evacuating and refilling the flask with nitrogen for three times, 300 mL anhydrous DCM
was injected, followed by trichloroacetonitrile (39.80 mL, 57.40 g, 4.0 equiv.). This
solution was cooled in an ice bath for 10 min before adding DBU (1.49 mL, 1.51 g, 0.1
equiv.). Then it was slowly warmed to r.t. Solvent was removed and the crude product
purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 3:2), giving 35.0 g (72 %)
product. This structure was confirmed with reported literature.49a, 49c
Synthesis of compound G-D-0550
G-D-04 (32.0 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After
evacuating and refilling the flask with nitrogen for three times, 300 mL anhydrous DCM
was injected, followed by 2-bromethanol (13.81 mL, 24.35 g, 3.0 equiv.). This solution
was cooled with dry ice/acetone for 30 min before adding boron trifluoride diethyl etherate

104

(8.19 mL, about 48 % BF3 basis, 1.0 equiv.). Then it was stirred and warmed to r.t. Excess
triethyl amine was added to quench the reaction and DCM added to dilute the solution.
Then it was washed three times with 1.0 M HCl solution, saturated NaHCO3, brine, dried
over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated. The crude product was purified by flash
column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 3:2), giving 25.0 g (85 %) product. The
structure was confirmed with reported literature.50
Synthesis of compound G-D-06

G-D-05 (23.0 g, 1.0 equiv.) was dissolved in 400 mL dry acetone and NaI (14.39 g, 1.9
equiv.) added. This solution was refluxed for 3 h before removing the solvent. The crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1), giving 25.0
g (99 %) product.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.22 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 1 H, c-H), 5.09 (t, J = 9.6 Hz, 1

H, d-H), 5.02 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 1 H, b-H), 4.56 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1 H, a-H), 4.28–4.24 (m, 1 H,
f-Ha), 4.16–4.07 (m, 2 H, f-Hb, g-Ha), 3.82–3.70 (m, 2 H, e-H, g-Hb), 3.31–3.23 (m, 2 H, hH), 2.10, 2.09, 2.03, 2.01 (4 × s, 12 H, 4 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.50 (C=O), 170.07 (C=O), 169.30 (C=O), 169.26

(C=O), 100.52 (C-a), 72.47 (C-c), 71.70 (C-e), 70.89 (C-b), 70.32 (C-d), 68.17 (C-g), 61.72
(C-f), 20.92 (CH3), 20.76 (CH3), 20.62 (CH3), 20.47 (CH3), 2.18 (C-h);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1741, 1365, 1211, 1167, 1032;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 525.0214 M+Na+ (Calculated: 525.0234 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound G-D-07
105

G-D-06 (25.0 g, 3.0 equiv.), N,N’-bis(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine (7.14 g,
1.0 equiv.), and potassium carbonate (9.17 g, 4.0 equiv.) were mixed in a flame-dried flask.
After evacuating and refilling the flask with nitrogen three times, anhydrous DMF (150
mL) was injected under nitrogen. The solution was stirred at 50 C for 20 h before
removing the DMF. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and the solution was filtered
through Celite and concentrated. The crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1 to EtOAc), giving 15.0 g (77 %) product.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.04–8.02 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.76–7.73 (m, 4H, Ar-H),

7.68–7.66 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 5.18 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2 H, c-H), 5.03 (t, J = 9.6 Hz, 2 H, d-H), 4.88
(t, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.53 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H, a-H), 4.28–4.23 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.15–
4.10 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.97–3.95 (m, 2 H, g-Ha), 3.78–3.71 (m, 4 H, e-H, g-Hb), 3.61–3.48
(m, 8 H, h-H, 1-H), 2.08, 2.03, 2.02, 2.00 (4 × s, 24 H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.31 (C=O), 169.78 (C=O), 169.23 (C=O), 147.87

(C-NO2), 133.75 (=C-H), 132.22 (=C-SO2), 132.03 (=C-H), 130.28 (=C-H), 124.13 (=CH), 100.31 (C-a), 72.47 (C-c), 71.49 (C-e), 70.72 (C-b), 68.02 (C-d), 67.78 (C-g), 61.55
(C-f), 48.22 (C-h), 47.13 (C-1), 20.43 (CH3), 20.35 (CH3), 20.30 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1742, 1670, 1543, 1365, 1213, 1161, 1032;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1201.2584 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1201.2577 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound G-D-08

106

G-D-07 (10.0 g, 1.0 equiv.) and potassium carbonate (5.86 g, 5.0 equiv.) in 75 mL
anhydrous DMF was degassed with nitrogen. PhSH (3.48 mL, 3.74 g, 4.0 equiv.) was
injected and the reaction was stirred at r.t. overnight. DMF was removed and DCM was
added to dissolve the residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH:Et3N =
400:100:5), giving product 5.50 g (80 %).
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.21 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2 H, c-H), 5.09 (t, J = 9.6 Hz, 2

H, d-H), 4.98 (t, J = 8.8 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.55 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H, a-H), 4.29–4.25 (m, 2 H,
f-Ha), 4.17–4.14 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 4.00–3.96 (m, 2 H, g-Ha), 3.72–3.68 (m, 4 H, e-H, g-Hb),
2.86–2.80 (m, 4 H, h-H), 2.76 (s, 4 H, 1-H), 2.67 (br, 2 H, NH), 2.10, 2.06, 2.03, 2.01 (4 ×
s, 24 H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.41 (C=O), 169.96 (C=O), 169.21 (C=O), 169.19

(C=O), 100.68 (C-a), 72.52 (C-c), 71.56 (C-e), 71.04 (C-b), 69.20 (C-d), 68.08 (C-g), 61.64
(C-f), 48.47 (C-h), 48.32 (C-1), 20.54 (CH3), 20.49 (CH3), 20.38 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1740, 1366, 1210, 1171, 1030;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 809.3167 M+H+ (Calculated: 809.3192 M+H+).
Synthesis of poly(HDI-G-D)

107

G-D-08 (2.138 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling the flask with nitrogen three times, 13 mL of anhydrous DMF was injected under
nitrogen, followed by HDI (0.446 mL, 0.467 g, 1.05 equiv.). This solution was stirred at
60 C for 40 h before removing DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of
DCM and precipitated from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum
to yield 2.50 g product as a white powder in 94 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.21 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2 H, c-H), 5.07 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 2

H, d-H), 4.97 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.55 (m, 2 H, a-H), 4.30–4.28 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.14–
4.10 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.96 (m, 2 H, g-Ha), 3.74–3.68 (m, 4 H, e-H, g-Hb), 3.42–3.20 (m, 12
H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 2.47 (br, 1 H, NH), 2.09, 2.03, 2.01 (4 × s, 24 H, 8 × CH3), 1.51–
1.35 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.24 (CH3C=O), 169.73 (CH3C=O), 169.19

(CH3C=O), 169.16 (CH3C=O), 158.56 (C-2, C-9), 100.54 (C-a), 72.34 (C-c), 71.42 (C-e),
70.75 (C-b), 69.73 (C-d), 67.94 (C-g), 61.41 (C-f), 48.19 (C-h), 46.80, 46.64, 46.39 (C-1,
C-3, C-8), 29.78, 29.74, 26.39, 26.35 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7), 20.39 (CH3), 20.25 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1740, 1366, 1210, 1171, 1030;
Synthesis of depro(HDI-G-D)

108

In a flame-dried flask, poly(HDI-G-D) (2.50 g) was dissolved in 20 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at r.t. for 2.5 h with the formation of a precipitate. The solvent was poured into
a beaker and the precipitate washed with MeOH. The MeOH was combined with the
original solvent. The precipitate was dried over high vacuum to get 1.00 g product (60 %).
Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the combined MeOH to adjust the pH
to approx. 6.0. After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the solvent was removed
to get product 0.65 g (39 %).
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.38–4.36 (m, 2 H, c-H), 3.89–3.81 (m, 4 H, d-H, b-

H), 3.71 (m, 2 H, a-H), 3.64–3.61 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 3.40–3.06 (m, 20 H, f-Hb, g-H, e-H, h-H,
1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 1.42–1.26 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 102.48 (C-a), 75.80 (C-c), 75.67 (C-e), 73.05 (C-b),
69.55 (C-d), 68.22 (C-g), 60.69 (C-f), 47.55, 45.75, 40.39 (C-h, C-1, C-3, C-8), 29.38,
29.24, 25.91 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.75, 159.63 (C-2, C-9), 102.53 (C-a), 75.82 (C-c),

75.70 (C-e), 73.08 (C-b), 69.58 (C-d), 68.24 (C-g), 60.72 (C-f), 47.62, 45.78, 40.41 (C-h,
C-1, C-3, C-8), 29.39, 29.27, 25.92 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3305, 2925, 1606, 1546, 1408, 1369, 1256, 1073, 1028;
109

Synthesis of sulf(HDI-G-D)

Depro(HDI-G-D) (0.725 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (4.30 g, 25.0 equiv.) was
added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times,
15 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. Then it was heated at 90 C for 24 h. After the
solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to 8.0 and
the polymer was isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white powder. Yield
= 1.50 g, 93 %.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.81 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.46 (m, 4 H, d-H, b-H), 4.36 (m,

2 H, a-H), 4.19–3.11 (m, 22 H, f-H, g-H, e-H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 1.47–1.30 (m, 8 H, 4H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.73 (C-2, C-9), 100.45 (C-a), 76.25 (C-c), 76.10

(C-e), 73.11 (C-b), 72.84 (C-d), 68.53 (C-g), 67.62 (C-f), 47.36, 45.84, 44.72, 40.68 (C-h,
C-1, C-3, C-8), 29.72, 29.34, 26.09, 25.79 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3462, 2937, 1621, 1541, 1221, 1031, 983.
Synthesis of compound M-D-0241
Iodine (1.0 g, 0.024 equiv.) was added into a suspension solution of mannose (30 g, 1.0
equiv.) and 100 mL acetic anhydride. This solution was stirred at r.t. for 30 min before

110

adding an excess sodium thiosulfate solution to quench the reaction. DCM was added three
times to extract the product. Saturated NaHCO3 solution was added into the organic layer
until no bubbles were seen to evolve. The organic layer was separated, washed with brine
and concentrated to give 64.5 g (99 %) product. The structure was confirmed with reported
literature.51
Synthesis of compound M-D-0352
Benzyl amine (26.9 mL, 26.4 g, 1.5 equiv.) was added to a solution of M-D-02 (64 g, 1.0
equiv.) in 400 mL THF. This solution was stirred at r.t. for 20 h before removing the solvent.
DCM was added to dissolve the residue and the solution was washed three times with 1.0
M HCl, followed by saturated NaHCO3 and brine, and dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate.
After concentration, the crude product was purified by flash column chromatography
(hexanes:EtOAc = 2:1), giving 48 g (84 %) product. The structure was confirmed with
reported literature.52
Synthesis of compound M-D-0452a
M-D-03 (26.6 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After
evacuating and refilling the flask with nitrogen three times, 300 mL anhydrous DCM was
injected, followed by trichloroacetonitrile (30.6 mL, 44.1 g, 4.0 equiv.). This solution was
cooled in an ice bath for 10 min before adding DBU (1.14 mL, 1.16 g, 0.1 equiv.). Then it
was warmed slowly up to r.t. Solvent was removed and the crude product was purified by
flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 2:1), giving 34 g (90 %) product. The
structure was confirmed using reported literature.52a
Synthesis of compound M-D-0553
M-D-04 (34 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After evacuating

111

and refilling the flask three times with nitrogen, 350 mL anhydrous DCM was injected,
followed by 2-bromethanol (14.67 mL, 25.9 g, 3.0 equiv.). This solution was cooled in dry
ice/acetone for 30 min before adding boron trifluoride diethyl etherate (8.70 mL, about 48 %
BF3 basis, 1.0 equiv.). Then, it was stirred and warmed up to r.t. overnight. Excess triethyl
amine was added to quench the reaction and DCM was added to dilute this solution. Then,
it was washed in 1.0 M HCl solution three times, saturated NaHCO3, and brine, then dried
over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated. The crude product was purified by flash
column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 5:2), giving 23 g (73 %) product. This structure
was confirmed using reported literature.53
Synthesis of compound M-D-06

NaI (12.65 g, 1.7 equiv.) was added to M-D-05 (22.6 g, 1.0 equiv.) dissolved in 400 mL
dry acetone. The solution was refluxed for 2 h before removing the solvent. The crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1), giving
product 24.0 g (96 %).
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.36–5.27 (m, 3 H, b-H, c-H, d-H), 4.89 (s, 1 H, a-

H), 4.30–4.26 (m, 1 H, f- Ha), 4.15–4.12 (m, 2 H, e-H, f-Hb), 3.97–3.82 (m, 2 H, g-H), 3.32
(t, J = 6.4 Hz, 2 H, h-H), 2.17, 2.12, 2.06, 2.01 (4 × s, 12 H, 4 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.21 (C=O), 169.63 (C=O), 169.50 (C=O), 169.42

(C=O), 97.23 (C-a), 69.09 (C-c), 68.89 (C-e), 68.85 (C-b), 68.68 (C-d), 65.66 (C-g), 62.13
(C-f), 20.63 (CH3), 20.53 (CH3), 20.48 (CH3), 20.44 (CH3), 1.72 (C-h);

112

FT-IR: (cm-1) 1742, 1732, 1380, 1366, 1224, 1135, 1082, 1048, 1009;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 525.0225 M+Na+ (Calculated: 525.0234 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound M-D-07

M-D-06 (23.5 g, 3.0 equiv.), N,N’-bis(2-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)-ethane-1,2-diamine (6.71 g,
1.0 equiv.), and potassium carbonate (8.62 g, 4.0 equiv.) was mixed in a flame-dried flask.
After evacuating and refilling the flask three times with nitrogen, anhydrous DMF (150
mL) was injected under nitrogen protection. This solution was stirred at 50 C for 24 hours
before removing DMF. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and the solution filtered
through Celite and concentrated. The crude product was purified by flash column
chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1 to 1:2), giving 18.0 g (98 %) product.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.04–8.01 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 7.76–7.73 (m, 4H, Ar-H),

7.69–7.67 (m, 2H, Ar-H), 5.27 (t, J = 9.6 Hz, 2 H, c-H), 5.20–5.16 (m, 4 H, b-H, d-H), 4.85
(s, 2 H, a-H), 4.30–4.26 (m, 2 H, f- Ha), 4.14–4.08 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.98–3.93 (m, 4 H, e-H,
g-Ha), 3.65 (m, 10 H, g-Hb, h-H, 1-H), 2.13, 2.10, 2.07, 1.95 (4 × s, 24 H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.46 (C=O), 169.70 (C=O), 169.61 (C=O), 169.50

(C=O), 147.87 (C-NO2), 133.82 (=C-H), 132.12 (=C-SO2), 132.06 (=C-H), 130.48 (=C-H),
124.22 (=C-H), 97.33 (C-a), 69.05 (C-c), 68.66 (C-e), 68.56 (C-b), 66.30 (C-d), 65.41 (Cg), 62.03 (C-f), 48.25 (C-h), 47.57 (C-1), 20.58 (CH3), 20.51 (CH3), 20.40 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1739, 1673, 1543, 1367, 1216, 1162, 1136, 1084, 1042;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 1201.2522 M+Na+ (Calculated: 1201.2577 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound M-D-08
113

M-D-07 (7.50 g, 1.0 equiv.) and potassium carbonate (4.40 g, 5.0 equiv.) in 75 mL
anhydrous DMF was degassed with nitrogen. PhSH (2.61 mL, 2.80 g, 4.0 equiv.) was
injected and the reaction stirred at r.t. overnight. DMF was removed and DCM was added
to dissolve the residue. After filtration through Celite and concentration, the crude product
was purified by flash column chromatography (DCM to DCM:MeOH = 10:1), giving
product 3.0 g (58 %).
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.35–5.26 (m, 6 H, b-H, c-H, d-H), 4.87 (s, 2 H, a-

H), 4.32–4.28 (m, 2 H, f- Ha), 4.12–4.09 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 4.04–4.03 (m, 2 H, e-H), 3.64–
3.62 (m, 2 H, g-Ha), 2.91–2.84 (m, 10 H, g-Hb, h-H, 1-H), 2.16, 2.11, 2.06, 1.99 (4 × s, 24
H, 8 × CH3);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.41 (C=O), 169.78 (C=O), 169.72 (C=O), 169.49

(C=O), 97.54 (C-a), 69.20 (C-c), 68.90 (C-e), 68.30 (C-b), 67.40 (C-d), 65.85 (C-g), 62.21
(C-f), 48.47 (C-h), 48.28 (C-1), 20.68 (CH3), 20.56 (CH3), 20.51 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1739, 1368, 1213, 1134, 1080, 1041, 977;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 809.3186 M+H+ (Calculated: 809.3192 M+H+).
Synthesis of poly(HDI-M-D)

114

M-D-08 (2.340 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling three times with nitrogen, 13 mL anhydrous DMF was injected under nitrogen
protection, following by HDI (0.488 mL, 0.511 g, 1.05 equiv.). This solution was stirred at
60 C for 40 hours before removing DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount
of DCM, and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under
vacuum to yield 2.81 g product as a white powder in 96 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 6.17 (br, 2 H, NH), 5.24 (m, 6 H, b-H, c-H, d-H),

4.87 (s, 2 H, a-H), 4.27 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.09 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.94–3.86 (m, 4 H, e-H, g-Ha),
3.58–3.22 (m, 14 H, g-Hb, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 2.15, 2.10, 2.06, 1.98 (4 × s, 24 H, 8 ×
CH3), 1.56–1.38 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 169.99 (CH3C=O), 169.37 (C=O), 169.07 (C=O),

158.11 (C-2, C-8), 97.07 (C-a), 68.67 (C-c), 68.52 (C-e), 68.13 (C-b), 67.44 (C-d), 65.22
(C-g), 61.84 (C-f), 49.95 (C-h), 46.01 (C-1), 40.33, 40.17 (C-3, C-8), 26.30, 26.18, 25.96,
25.76 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7), 20.16 (CH3), 20.18 (CH3);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1740, 1626, 1537, 1367, 1213, 1135, 1083, 1039, 977;
Synthesis of depro(HDI-M-D)

115

In a flame-dried flask, poly(HDI-M-D) (2.74 g) was dissolved in 30 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at r.t. overnight with the formation of a precipitate. The solvent was poured into
a beaker and the precipitate washed with MeOH. The MeOH was combined with the
original solvent. Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the combined MeOH
to adjust the pH to approx. 6.0. After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the
solvent was removed and combined with the precipitate to get 1.66 g (91 %) product.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 3.76–2.79 (m, 30 H, a-H, b-H, c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, g-

H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 8-H), 1.41–1.26 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 99.54 (C-a), 72.49 (C-c), 70.58 (C-e), 69.94 (C-b),
66.50 (C-d), 65.51 (C-g), 60.70 (C-f), 46.80 (C-h), 45.83 (C-1), 40.34 (C-3, C-8), 29.43
(C-4, C-5), 25.91 (C-6, C-7);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.34 (C-2, C-8), 99.56 (C-a), 72.71 (C-c), 70.60

(C-e), 69.96 (C-b), 66.52 (C-d), 65.51 (C-g), 60.71 (C-f), 47.13 (C-h), 45.85 (C-1), 40.34
(C-3, C-8), 29.40 (C-4, C-5), 25.90 (C-6, C-7);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3313, 2926, 1612, 1540, 1404, 1370, 1268, 1131, 1021, 974;
Synthesis of sulf(HDI-M-D)
116

Depro(HDI-M-D) (0.72 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (5.47 g, 32.0 equiv.) was
added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling the flask three times with
nitrogen, 20 mL of anhydrous pyridine was injected. Then it was heat at 90 C for 24 h.
After the solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to
8.0 and the polymer isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white powder.
Yield = 1.50 g, 94 %.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.28 (m, 2 H, c-H), 5.03 (m, 2 H, b-H), 4.58–4.35 (m,

8 H, d-H, a-H, f-H), 4.07–4.02 (m, 4 H, e-H, g-Ha), 3.78–3.28 (m, 14 H, g-Hb, h-H, 1-H,
3-H, 8-H), 1.63–1.46 (m, 8 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H);
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.41 (C-2, C-8), 96.99 (C-a), 75.18 (C-c), 73.82

(C-e), 71.50 (C-b), 69.59 (C-d), 66.92 (C-g), 66.31 (C-f), 46.95 (C-h), 45.91 (C-1), 40.75
(C-3, C-8), 29.81, 29.57 (C-4, C-5), 26.18, 25.92 (C-6, C-7);
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3453, 2932, 1624, 1540, 1222, 1049, 1011.
2.5.3

Contact angle measurements

Surface hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of the synthesized polymers was determined by
measuring the contact angles with a Ramé-hart contact angle goniometer (Model 200-F1).

117

DCM or methanol solutions of the synthesized polymers were spin-cast onto a polished Si
wafer and dried overnight to produce solvent-cast thin films. 10 μL of distilled water was
placed onto the polymer surface using a micropipette. Contact angles were calculated with
a tangent method using the software supplied with the goniometer. Each sample was
measured at least three times with different drops of water and the averaged data are
reported. The advancing and receding contact angles were recorded by tilting the base to
35°.
2.5.4

Platelet adhesion assay

The synthesized polymers (10 mg/mL in MeOH or H2O) were spin-coated onto a polished
Si wafer at 3000 rpm, and dried in vacuum for 1 h to obtain the polymer-coated Si wafers,
which were then cut and placed into the wells of a 24-well tissue culture plate. CaCl2 (1.0
mol/L) was added to platelet rich plasma to a final concentration of 2.0 mmol/L. This
solution (1.0 mL) was immediately added into the 24-well tissue culture plates and
incubated at 37 C for 1 h with the coated wafers. After pipetting out the platelet rich
plasma, the polymer coated Si wafers were rinsed with tri-buffered saline solution (TBS,
1.0 mL) three times, followed by incubating in 2% glutaraldehyde/TBS solution (1.0 mL)
for 30 min to fix the adhered platelets. The wafers were removed from the plates and rinsed
with TBS solution (1.0 mL) two times, followed by rinses with a series of ethanol solutions
(50 %, 70 %, 90 % and 100 %). Finally, the adhered platelets were analyzed by SEM. For
each wafer the average number of platelets were counted by using 9 images of 100  100
m2/field using ImageJ software.
2.5.5

aPTT assay

aPTT assay were initiated in mouse platelet poor plasma (PPP) via use of Sta-PTT reagent

118

on a STA-Hemostasis Analyzer (Diagnostica Stago). Sulfated polymers were dissolved in
HEPES buffered saline (pH 7.3) and spiked into plasma prior to the initiation of the aPTT
as 1/10 volume of the sample. Control specimens were spiked with HEPES buffered saline
only. The final concentrations of the final sulfated polymers are as indicated in the text.
2.5.6

PT assay

Thromboplastin (Biopol) was reconstituted with 5 mL of water and warmed alongside
wild-type mouse plasma which contained the polymer under study (prepared as for the
aPTT assay) to 37 C. The thromboplastin and plasma were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and
agitated until a clot was observed to form.
2.5.7

TT assay

A solution of 20 units/mL of thrombin and 400 mM CaCl2 in HEPES buffered saline was
prepared and kept on ice until use. Separately, wild-type mouse plasma containing the
polymer under study (prepared as for the aPTT assay) was warmed to 37 C. The thrombin
solution and wild-type mouse plasma were then mixed in a 1:10 ratio and agitated until a
clot was observed to form.
2.5.8

Anti-FXa and anti-FIIa assay

Anti-Xa and anti-IIa assays were performed in human PPP. For the anti-Xa assay, a Coatest
Heparin assay kit (Chromogenix) was obtained and performed via manufacturer’s
recommendations adapted for a 96 well plate. Again, 1/10 volume sulfated polymers were
spiked into the plasma prior to determination of the anti-Xa activity. For the anti-IIa assay,
S-2238 (Chromogenix), human thrombin, and human antithrombin (Enzyme Research
Laboratories) were utilized. The anti-IIa assay was adapted for a 96-well plate from the
Chromogenix protocol for S-2238. The sulfated polymers were spiked into the plasma prior

119

to initiation of the assay. To determine the ATIII dependence of the sulfated polymers, the
anti-IIa assay was repeated with ATIII depleted human plasma (Affinity Biologicals) and
omitted addition of exogenous ATIII. For all assays, pharmaceutical grade heparin (APP
Pharmaceuticals) was used for the standard curves.

120

2.6 References
1.

Kajiyama, T.; Takahara, A., Surface properties and platelet reactivity of segmented

poly(etherurethanes) and poly(etherurethaneureas). J. Biomater. Appl. 1991, 6 (1), 42-71.
2.

(a) Brandwood, A.; Gunatillake, P.; Meijs, G. F.; Rizzardo, E.; Schindhelm, K. H.

Polyurethane or polyurethane-urea elastomeric compositions. US5393858 A, 1995; (b)
Gilding, D.; Reed, A.; Askill, I.; Briana, S., Mitrathane (R) A New Polyether Urethane Urea
for Critical Medical Applications. ASAIO J. 1984, 30 (1), 571-576; (c) Gogolewski, S.,
Selected topics in biomedical polyurethanes. A review. Colloid. Polym. Sci. 1989, 267 (9),
757-785; (d) McMillin, C. R., Elastomers for biomedical applications. Rubber Chem.
Technol. 1994, 67 (3), 417-446.
3.

Yeganeh, H.; Orang, F.; Solouk, A.; Rafienia, M., Synthesis, characterization and

preliminary investigation of blood compatibility of novel epoxy-modified polyurethane
networks. J. Bioact. Compat. Polym. 2008, 23 (3), 276-300.
4.

(a) Grasel, T. G.; Cooper, S. L., Properties and biological inteactions of

polyurethane anionomers: Effect of sulfonate incorporation. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1989,
23 (3), 311-338; (b) Silver, J. H.; Hart, A. P.; Williams, E. C.; Cooper, S. L.; Charef, S.;
Labarre, D.; Jozefowicz, M., Anticoagulant effects of sulphonated polyurethanes.
Biomaterials 1992, 13 (6), 339-344.
5.

Santerre, J.; Ten Hove, P.; VanderKamp, N.; Brash, J., Effect of sulfonation of

segmented polyurethanes on the transient adsorption of fibrinogen from plasma: possible
correlation with anticoagulant behavior. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1992, 26 (1), 39-57.
6.

Xu, F.; Flanagan, C. E.; Ruiz, A.; Crone, W. C.; Masters, K. S.,

Polyurethane/Dermatan Sulfate Copolymers as Hemocompatible, Non-Biofouling

121

Materials. Macromol. Biosci. 2011, 11 (2), 257-266.
7.

Okkema, A.; Cooper, S., Effect of carboxylate and/or sulphonate ion incorporation

on the physical and blood-contacting properties of a polyetherurethane. Biomaterials 1991,
12 (7), 668-676.
8.

Heuck, C. C.; Schiele, U.; Horn, D.; Fronda, D.; Ritz, E., The Role of Surface-

Charge on the Accelerating Action of Heparin on the Antithrombin Iii Inhibited Activity of
Alpha-Thrombin. J. Biol. Chem. 1985, 260 (8), 4598-4603.
9.

Petitou, M.; van Boeckel, C. A. A., A synthetic antithrombin III binding

pentasaccharide is now a drug! What comes next? Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2004, 43 (24),
3118-3133.
10.

Olson, S. T.; Chuang, Y. J., Heparin activates antithrombin anticoagulant function

by generating new interaction sites (exosites) for blood clotting proteinases. Trends
Cardiovasc. Med. 2002, 12 (8), 331-338.
11.

Liu, H.; Zhang, Z.; Linhardt, R. J., Lessons learned from the contamination of

heparin. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2009, 26 (3), 313-321.
12.

de Kort, M.; Buijsman, R. C.; van Boeckel, C. A. A., Synthetic heparin derivatives

as new anticoagulant drugs. Drug Discovery Today 2005, 10 (11), 769-779.
13.

Warkentin, T. E.; Chong, B. H.; Greinacher, A., Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia:

Towards consensus. Thromb. Haemostasis 1998, 79 (1), 1-7.
14.

Hirsh, J.; Levine, M., Low molecular weight heparin. Blood 1992, 79 (1), 1-17.

15.

(a) Petitou, M.; Hérault, J.-P.; Bernat, A.; Driguez, P.-A.; Duchaussoy, P.; Lormeau,

J.-C.; Herbert, J.-M., Synthesis of thrombin-inhibiting heparin mimetics without side
effects. Nature 1999, 398 (6726), 417-422; (b) Xu, Y. M.; Masuko, S.; Takieddin, M.; Xu,

122

H. M.; Liu, R. P.; Jing, J.; Mousa, S. A.; Linhardt, R. J.; Liu, J., Chemoenzymatic Synthesis
of Homogeneous Ultralow Molecular Weight Heparins. Science 2011, 334 (6055), 498501.
16.

(a) Warkentin, T. E.; Levine, M. N.; Hirsh, J.; Horsewood, P.; Roberts, R. S.; Gent,

M.; Kelton, J. G., Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia in Patients Treated with LowMolecular-Weight Heparin or Unfractionated Heparin. N. Engl. J. Med. 1995, 332 (20),
1330-1336; (b) Weitz, J. I.; Linkins, L.-A., Beyond heparin and warfarin: the new
generation of anticoagulants. Expert Opin. Invest. Drugs 2007, 16 (3), 271-282.
17.

Petitou, M.; Jacquinet, J.-C.; Sinay, P.; Choay, J.; Lormeau, J.-C.; Nassr, M. Process

for the organic synthesis of oligosaccharides and derivatives thereof. US4818816 A, 1989.
18.

Seifert, J.; Singh, L.; Ramsdale, T. E.; West, M. L.; Drinnan, N. B. Synthetic heparin

pentasaccharides. EP1440077 B1, 2009.
19.

(a) Sangaj, N.; Kyriakakis, P.; Yang, D.; Chang, C. W.; Arya, G.; Varghese, S.,

Heparin Mimicking Polymer Promotes Myogenic Differentiation of Muscle Progenitor
Cells. Biomacromolecules 2010, 11 (12), 3294-3300; (b) Nguyen, T. H.; Kim, S.-H.;
Decker, C. G.; Wong, D. Y.; Loo, J. A.; Maynard, H. D., A heparin-mimicking polymer
conjugate stabilizes basic fibroblast growth factor. Nat. Chem. 2013, 5 (3), 221-227; (c)
Matsumoto, N. M.; Prabhakaran, P.; Rome, L. H.; Maynard, H. D., Smart Vaults:
Thermally-Responsive Protein Nanocapsules. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (1), 867-874; (d)
Vázquez-Dorbatt, V.; Lee, J.; Lin, E.-W.; Maynard, H. D., Synthesis of Glycopolymers by
Controlled Radical Polymerization Techniques and Their Applications. ChemBioChem
2012, 13 (17), 2478-2487; (e) Christman, K. L.; Vazquez-Dorbatt, V.; Schopf, E.; Kolodziej,
C. M.; Li, R. C.; Broyer, R. M.; Chen, Y.; Maynard, H. D., Nanoscale Growth Factor

123

Patterns by Immobilization on a Heparin-Mimicking Polymer. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008,
130 (49), 16585-16591.
20.

Ayres, N.; Holt, D. J.; Jones, C. F.; Corum, L. E.; Grainger, D. W., Polymer Brushes

Containing Sulfonated Sugar Repeat Units: Synthesis, Charaderization, and In Vitro
Testing of Blood Coagulation Activation. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 2008, 46
(23), 7713-7724.
21.

Akashi, M.; Sakamoto, N.; Suzuki, K.; Kishida, A., Synthesis and anticoagulant

activity of sulfated glucoside-bearing polymer. Bioconjugate Chem. 1996, 7 (4), 393-395.
22.

(a) Hou, S.; Sun, X.-L.; Dong, C.-M.; Chaikof, E. L., Facile Synthesis of Chain-

End Functionalized Glycopolymers for Site-Specific Bioconjugation. Bioconjugate Chem.
2004, 15 (5), 954-959; (b) Guan, R.; Sun, X.-L.; Hou, S.; Wu, P.; Chaikof, E. L., A
Glycopolymer Chaperone for Fibroblast Growth Factor-2. Bioconjugate Chem. 2004, 15
(1), 145-151; (c) Grande, D.; Baskaran, S.; Chaikof, E. L., Glycosaminoglycan mimetic
biomaterials. 2. Alkene- and acrylate-derivatized glycopolymers via cyanoxyl-mediated
free-radical polymerization. Macromolecules 2001, 34 (6), 1640-1646; (d) Sun, X.-L.;
Grande, D.; Baskaran, S.; Hanson, S. R.; Chaikof, E. L., Glycosaminoglycan Mimetic
Biomaterials. 4. Synthesis of Sulfated Lactose-Based Glycopolymers That Exhibit
Anticoagulant Activity. Biomacromolecules 2002, 3 (5), 1065-1070; (e) Grande, D.;
Baskaran, S.; Baskaran, C.; Gnanou, Y.; Chaikof, E. L., Glycosaminoglycan-mimetic
biomaterials. 1. Nonsulfated and sulfated glycopolymers by cyanoxyl-mediated freeradical polymerization. Macromolecules 2000, 33 (4), 1123-1125; (f) Baskaran, S.; Grande,
D.; Sun, X. L.; Yayon, A.; Chaikof, E. L., Glycosaminoglycan-mimetic biomaterials. 3.
Glycopolymers prepared from alkene-derivatized mono- and disaccharide-based

124

glycomonomers. Bioconjugate Chem. 2002, 13 (6), 1309-1313; (g) Sun, X.-L.; Faucher, K.
M.; Houston, M.; Grande, D.; Chaikof, E. L., Design and Synthesis of Biotin ChainTerminated Glycopolymers for Surface Glycoengineering. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124
(25), 7258-7259; (h) Faucher, K. M.; Sun, X.-L.; Chaikof, E. L., Fabrication and
Characterization of Glycocalyx-Mimetic Surfaces. Langmuir 2003, 19 (5), 1664-1670.
23.

(a) Oh, Y. I.; Sheng, G. J.; Chang, S.-K.; Hsieh-Wilson, L. C., Tailored

Glycopolymers as Anticoagulant Heparin Mimetics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52 (45),
11796-11799; (b) Sheng, G. J.; Oh, Y. I.; Chang, S.-K.; Hsieh-Wilson, L. C., Tunable
Heparan Sulfate Mimetics for Modulating Chemokine Activity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013,
135 (30), 10898-10901.
24.

Taylor, L.; Chen, X.; Ayres, N., Synthesis of a glycosaminoglycan polymer mimetic

using an N-alkyl-N,N-linked urea oligomer containing glucose pendant groups. Polym. Int.
2014, 63 (1), 127-135.
25.

Baumann, H.; Faust, V., Concepts for improved regioselective placement of O-sulfo,

N-sulfo, N-acetyl, and N-carboxymethyl groups in chitosan derivatives. Carbohydr. Res.
2001, 331 (1), 43-57.
26.

Hatanaka, K.; Yoshida, T.; Miyahara, S.; Sato, T.; Ono, F.; Uryu, T.; Kuzuhara, H.,

Synthesis of new heparinoids with high anticoagulant activity. J. Med. Chem. 1987, 30 (5),
810-814.
27.

Fasl, H.; Stana, J.; Stropnik, D.; Strnad, S.; Stana-Kleinschek, K.; Ribitsch, V.,

Improvement of the Hemocompatibility of PET Surfaces Using Different Sulphated
Polysaccharides as Coating Materials. Biomacromolecules 2010, 11 (2), 377-381.
28.

(a) Charef, S.; Tapon-Bretaudière, J.; Fischer, A.-M.; Pflüger, F.; Jozefowicz, M.;

125

Labarre, D., Heparin-like functionalized polymer surfaces: discrimination between
catalytic and adsorption processes during the course of thrombin inhibition. Biomaterials
1996, 17 (9), 903-912; (b) Dulos, E.; Dufourcq, J.; Fougnot, C.; Jozefowicz, M.,
Adsorption of plasma proteins onto anticoagulant polystyrene derivatives: a fluorescence
study. Biomaterials 1988, 9 (5), 405-412; (c) Migonney, V.; Fougnot, C.; Jozefowicz, M.,
Heparin-like tubings: III. Kinetics and mechanism of thrombin, antithrombin III and
thrombin-antithrombin

complex

adsorption

under

controlled-flow

conditions.

Biomaterials 1988, 9 (5), 413-418; (d) Wu, S. J.; Chun, M. W.; Shin, K. H.; Toida, T.; Park,
Y.; Linhardt, R. J.; Kim, Y. S., Chemical sulfonation and anticoagulant activity of acharan
sulfate. Thromb. Res. 1998, 92 (6), 273-281.
29.

(a) Chen, X.; Ayres, N., Synthesis of Novel Polymer/Urea Peptoid Conjugates

Using RAFT Polymerization. Macromolecules 2010, 43 (3), 1341-1348; (b) Chen, X.;
Ayres, N., Synthesis of low grafting density molecular brush from a poly(N-alkyl urea
peptoid) backbone. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 2011, 49 (14), 3030-3037; (c)
Chen, X.; Ding, K.; Ayres, N., Investigation into fiber formation in N-alkyl urea peptoid
oligomers and the synthesis of a water-soluble PEG/N-alkyl urea peptoid oligomer
conjugate. Polym. Chem. 2011, 2 (11), 2635-2642.
30.

Aucagne, V.; Leigh, D. A.; Lock, J. S.; Thomson, A. R., Rotaxanes of Cyclic

Peptides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128 (6), 1784-1785.
31.

Moker, J.; Thiem, J., Synthesis of Novel gluco- and galacto-Functionalized

Platinum Complexes. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2009, (28), 4842-4847.
32.

Kim, C.; Hoang, R.; Theodorakis, E. A., Synthetic Studies on Norrisolide:

Enantioselective Synthesis of the Norrisane Side Chain. Org. Lett. 1999, 1 (8), 1295-1297.

126

33.

(a) Isac-García, J.; Calvo-Flores, F. G.; Hernández-Mateo, F.; Santoyo-González,

F., Synthesis of Disaccharides, Containing Sulfur in the Ring of the Reducing
Monosaccharide Unit, Through a Nonglycosylating Chemical Strategy. Chem. Eur. J. 1999,
5 (5), 1512-1525; (b) Ueno, Y.; Hori, K.; Yamauchi, R.; Kiso, M.; Hasegawa, A.; Kato, K.,
Reaction of some D-glucobioses with 2,2-dimethoxypropane. Carbohydr. Res. 1981, 96
(1), 65-72.
34.

Huang, Y.; Taylor, L.; Chen, X.; Ayres, N., Synthesis of a polyurea from a glucose-

or mannose-containing N-alkyl urea peptoid oligomer. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem.
2013, 51 (24), 5230-5238.
35.

Michiardi, A.; Aparicio, C.; Ratner, B. D.; Planell, J. A.; Gil, J., The influence of

surface energy on competitive protein adsorption on oxidized NiTi surfaces. Biomaterials
2007, 28 (4), 586-594.
36.

(a) Lamba, N. M. K.; Woodhouse, K. A.; Cooper, S. L., Polyurethanes in

biomedical applications. CRC press: 1997; (b) Vermette, P.; Griesser, H. J.; Laroche, G.;
Guidoin, R., Biomedical applications of polyurethanes. Landes Bioscience Georgetown,
TX: 2001; (c) Burke, A.; Hasirci, N., Polyurethanes in Biomedical Applications. In
Biomaterials, Hasirci, N.; Hasirci, V., Eds. Springer US: 2004; Vol. 553, pp 83-101; (d)
Zdrahala, R. J.; Zdrahala, I. J., Biomedical Applications of Polyurethanes: A Review of
Past Promises, Present Realities, and a Vibrant Future. J. Biomater. Appl. 1999, 14 (1), 6790.
37.

(a) You, I.; Kang, S. M.; Byun, Y.; Lee, H., Enhancement of blood compatibility of

poly(urethane) substrates by mussel-inspired adhesive heparin coating. Bioconjugate
Chem. 2011, 22 (7), 1264-1269; (b) Lin, W. C.; Liu, T. Y.; Yang, M. C., Hemocompatibility

127

of polyacrylonitrile dialysis membrane immobilized with chitosan and heparin conjugate.
Biomaterials 2004, 25 (10), 1947-1957; (c) Yang, Z. L.; Wang, J.; Luo, R. F.; Li, X.; Chen,
S.; Sun, H.; Huang, N., Improved Hemocompatibility Guided by Pulsed Plasma Tailoring
the Surface Amino Functionalities of TiO2 Coating for Covalent Immobilization of Heparin.
Plasma Processes Polym. 2011, 8 (9), 850-858.
38.

(a) Lee, Y.-K.; Hyung Park, J.; Tae Moon, H.; Yun Lee, D.; Han Yun, J.; Byun, Y.,

The short-term effects on restenosis and thrombosis of echinomycin-eluting stents
topcoated with a hydrophobic heparin-containing polymer. Biomaterials 2007, 28 (8),
1523-1530; (b) Jiang, J.-H.; Zhu, L.-P.; Li, X.-L.; Xu, Y.-Y.; Zhu, B.-K., Surface
modification of PE porous membranes based on the strong adhesion of polydopamine and
covalent immobilization of heparin. J. Membrane Sci. 2010, 364 (1-2), 194-202; (c) Yang,
Z.; Wang, J.; Luo, R.; Maitz, M. F.; Jing, F.; Sun, H.; Huang, N., The covalent
immobilization of heparin to pulsed-plasma polymeric allylamine films on 316L stainless
steel and the resulting effects on hemocompatibility. Biomaterials 2010, 31 (8), 2072-2083;
(d) Bae, I.-H.; Park, I.-K.; Park, D. S.; Lee, H.; Jeong, M. H., Thromboresistant and
endothelialization effects of dopamine-mediated heparin coating on a stent material surface.
J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med. 2012, 23 (5), 1259-1269.
39.

Leung, L. L., Perioperative evaluation of bleeding diathesis. ASH Education

Program Book 2006, 2006 (1), 457-461.
40.

Csuk, R.; Horing, U.; Schaade, M., Chain extension of aldonolactones by samarium

iodide mediated Dreiding-Schmidt reactions and samarium assisted Imamoto reactions.
Tetrahedron 1996, 52 (29), 9759-9776.
41.

Kartha, K. P. R.; Field, R. A., Iodine: A versatile reagent in carbohydrate chemistry

128

IV. per-O-acetylation, regioselective acylation and acetolysis. Tetrahedron 1997, 53 (34),
11753-11766.
42.

Wang, R.; Steensma, D. H.; Takaoka, Y.; Yun, J. W.; Kajimoto, T.; Wong, C. H., A

search for pyrophosphate mimics for the development of substrates and inhibitors of
glycosyltransferases. Biorg. Med. Chem. 1997, 5 (4), 661-672.
43.

(a) Moynihan, H. A.; Hayes, J. A.; Eccles, K. S.; Coles, S. J.; Lawrence, S. E.,

Hydrogen bonding in crystal forms of primary amide functionalised glucose and cellobiose.
Carbohydr. Res. 2013, 374, 29-39; (b) Ruff, Y.; Buhler, E.; Candau, S. J.; Kesselman, E.;
Talmon, Y.; Lehn, J. M., Glycodynamers: Dynamic Polymers Bearing Oligosaccharides
Residues - Generation, Structure, Physicochemical, Component Exchange, and Lectin
Binding Properties. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132 (8), 2573-2584.
44.

Koeller, K. M.; Smith, M. E. B.; Wong, C. H., Chemoenzymatic synthesis of PSGL-

1 glycopeptides: Sulfation on tyrosine affects glycosyltransferase-catalyzed synthesis of
the O-glycan. Biorg. Med. Chem. 2000, 8 (5), 1017-1025.
45.

Chao, C. S.; Chen, M. C.; Lin, S. C.; Mong, K. K. T., Versatile acetylation of

carbohydrate substrates with bench-top sulfonic acids and application to one-pot syntheses
of peracetylated thioglycosides. Carbohydr. Res. 2008, 343 (5), 957-964.
46.

(a) Chen, M. J.; Huang, C. S.; He, C. S.; Zhu, W. P.; Xu, Y. F.; Lu, Y. F., A glucose-

responsive controlled release system using glucose oxidase-gated mesoporous silica
nanocontainers. Chem. Commun. 2012, 48 (76), 9522-9524; (b) Iyer, S. S.; Rele, S. M.;
Baskaran, S.; Chaikof, E. L., Design and synthesis of hyaluronan-mimetic gemini
disaccharides. Tetrahedron 2003, 59 (5), 631-638; (c) Rele, S. M.; Iyer, S. S.; Baskaran, S.;
Chaikof, E. L., Design and synthesis of dimeric heparinoid mimetics. J. Org. Chem. 2004,

129

69 (26), 9159-9170.
47.

Tojino, M.; Mizuno, M., Towards oligosaccharide library synthesis by fluorous

mixture method. Tetrahedron Lett. 2008, 49 (41), 5920-5923.
48.

(a) Michihata, N.; Kaneko, Y.; Kasai, Y.; Tanigawa, K.; Hirokane, T.; Higasa, S.;

Yamada, H., High-Yield Total Synthesis of (-)-Strictinin through Intramolecular Coupling
of Gallates. J. Org. Chem. 2013, 78 (9), 4319-4328; (b) Bernardes, G. J. L.; Marston, J. P.;
Batsanov, A. S.; Howard, J. A. K.; Davis, B. G., A trisulfide-linked glycoprotein. Chem.
Commun. 2007, (30), 3145-3147.
49.

(a) Cook, B. N.; Bhakta, S.; Biegel, T.; Bowman, K. G.; Armstrong, J. I.;

Hemmerich, S.; Bertozzi, C. R., Differential carbohydrate recognition of two GlcNAc-6sulfotransferases with possible roles in L-selectin ligand biosynthesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2000, 122 (36), 8612-8622; (b) Cai, T. B.; Lu, D. N.; Tang, X. P.; Zhang, Y. L.; Landerholm,
M.; Wang, P. G., New glycosidase activated nitric oxide donors: Glycose and 3morphorlinosydnonimine conjugates. J. Org. Chem. 2005, 70 (9), 3518-3524; (c) Wegner,
J.; Ley, S. V.; Kirschning, A.; Hansen, A. L.; Garcia, J. M.; Baxendale, I. R., A Total
Synthesis of Millingtonine A. Org. Lett. 2012, 14 (3), 696-699.
50.

(a) Pulsipher, A.; Yousaf, M. N., A renewable, chemoselective, and quantitative

ligand density microarray for the study of biospecific interactions. Chem. Commun. 2011,
47 (1), 523-525; (b) Quagliotto, P.; Viscardi, G.; Barolo, C.; D'Angelo, D.; Barni, E.;
Compari, C.; Duce, E.; Fisicaro, E., Synthesis and properties of new glucocationic
surfactants: Model structures for marking cationic surfactants with carbohydrates. J. Org.
Chem. 2005, 70 (24), 9857-9866.
51.

(a) Percec, V.; Leowanawat, P.; Sun, H. J.; Kulikov, O.; Nusbaum, C. D.; Tran, T.

130

M.; Bertin, A.; Wilson, D. A.; Peterca, M.; Zhang, S. D.; Kamat, N. P.; Vargo, K.; Moock,
D.; Johnston, E. D.; Hammer, D. A.; Pochan, D. J.; Chen, Y. C.; Chabre, Y. M.; Shiao, T.
C.; Bergeron-Brlek, M.; Andre, S.; Roy, R.; Gabius, H. J.; Heiney, P. A., Modular Synthesis
of

Amphiphilic

Janus

Glycodendrimers

and

Their

Self-Assembly

into

Glycodendrimersomes and Other Complex Architectures with Bioactivity to Biomedically
Relevant Lectins. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135 (24), 9055-9077; (b) Sardzik, R.; Noble, G.
T.; Weissenborn, M. J.; Martin, A.; Webb, S. J.; Flitsch, S. L., Preparation of aminoethyl
glycosides for glycoconjugation. Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2010, 6, 699-703.
52.

(a) Sudibya, H. G.; Ma, J. M.; Dong, X. C.; Ng, S.; Li, L. J.; Liu, X. W.; Chen, P.,

Interfacing Glycosylated Carbon-Nanotube-Network Devices with Living Cells to Detect
Dynamic Secretion of Biomolecules. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48 (15), 2723-2726; (b)
Ikeda, K.; Morimoto, T.; Kakiuchi, K., Utilization of Aldoses as a Carbonyl Source in
Cyclocarbonylation of Enynes. J. Org. Chem. 2010, 75 (18), 6279-6282.
53.

(a) Lindhorst, T. K.; Kotter, S.; Krallmann-Wenzel, U.; Ehlers, S., Trivalent alpha-

D-mannoside clusters as inhibitors of type-1 fimbriae-mediated adhesion of Escherichia
coli: structural variation and biotinylation. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1 2001, (8), 823831; (b) Skirtenko, N.; Richman, M.; Nitzan, Y.; Gedanken, A.; Rahimipour, S., A facile
one-pot sonochemical synthesis of surface-coated mannosyl protein microspheres for
detection and killing of bacteria. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 (45), 12277-12279.

131

Chapter 3. Polyurea Glycopolymers with Different Diisocyanate Comonomers:
Synthesis and Anticoagulant Properties

3.1 Abstract
In this chapter, the influence of polymer chemical structure and degree of sulfation on blood
compatibility of polyurea glycopolymers were studied. Polymers were synthesized from
mannose or lactose containing diamines with different diisocyanates; toluene 2,4diisocyanate (TDI), isophorone diisocyanate (IPDI), methylene bis(4-cyclohexyl
isocyanate) (HMDI), and hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI). The influence of degree of
sulfation was investigated by synthesizing sulfated HMDI and lactose-based diamine
polyurea glycopolymers with sulfur contents ranging from ~3% to 15.4%. The obtained
glycopolymers have been characterized using gel permeation chromatography (GPC),
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(FT-IR) and elemental analysis. The influence of the chemical structure of the polymers
was probed by measuring the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), thrombin time
(TT), and prothrombin time (PT) of the sulfated glycopolymers. Sulf(HMDI-L-D) and
sulf(IPDI-M-D) exhibited higher prolongation of aPTT values than the other diisocyanatecontaining sulfated glycopolymers. aPTT indicated that higher degrees of sulfation resulted
in prolonged clotting times.

3.2 Introduction
Biomaterials interface with biological systems to evaluate, treat, augment, or replace a
body’s tissue, organ, or function.1 Polyurethane-ureas are widely used in biomaterials, and

132

can be found in vascular prostheses, catheters, blood pump, heart valves, blood filters,
blood tubing, and artificial hearts.2 These applications of polyurethane-urea materials are
enabled by the diverse chemical structures available, the monomer structure influencing
the shape, rigidity, and hydrophobicity of resulting polymers. Therefore, different
structures produce different physical properties or biocompatibility in resulting polymers.
In our work we are focused on polymer blood compatibility. A non-native biomaterial may
initiate a cascade of events upon contact with blood involving protein adsorption, cellbiomaterial surface interaction, platelet adhesion and activation, and clot formation.3 Many
polyurethane-ureas exhibit poor biocompatibility due to their hydrophobicity.4 Common
strategies for improving biocompatibilities of polyurethane-ureas are incorporating
hydrophilic functional groups or known blood-compatible materials, including
phosphates,5 sulfonates,6 peptides,7 poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG),8 or dermatan sulfate9.
Heparin has been used as an anticoagulant drug for over 80 years and proposed for use in
blood contacting biomaterials.10 Heparin is a linear, highly sulfated, and negatively charged
polysaccharide. However, there are several concerns with using heparin.11 These concerns
include heparin’s diverse structure, which results in batch dependent dose-response
relationships; risk of pathogen contamination, such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy;,
potential contamination of therapeutic heparins (e.g. the heparin contamination seen in
2008);12 and possible heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. One solution for mitigating these
disadvantages is to synthesize heparin-mimicking polymers, designed to impart the
biological functions of heparin while alleviating the inherent safety concerns of a
mammalian sourced biomacromolecule.13 Our group has published syntheses of heparinmimicking

polymers

using

step-growth

133

polymerization

and

chain–growth

polymerization.14 Sulfated polyurea glycopolymers with glucose, mannose, lactose or
glucosamine groups were synthesized from acetyl protected sugar-containing diamines
with HDI. The blood compatibility of the glycopolymers were tested using anticoagulant
assays, including aPTT, PT, and TT assays, and the best anticoagulant activities were
observed with polymers with mannose or lactose functionalized polymers.
In this chapter, we examine how changing the polymer backbone while maintaining the
same sugar moieties affects blood compatibility. Mannose and lactose containing diamines
were reacted with four different diisocyanates, i.e. TDI, IPDI, HMDI, and HDI, to produce
a set of polyurea glycopolymers. The influence of degree of sulfation toward anticoagulant
properties was investigated by using HMDI-based polyureas with different degrees of
sulfation on the lactose.

3.3 Results and discussion
In the previous chapter,14a, 14b sulfated polyurea glycopolymers with pendant glucose,
mannose, lactose, or glucosamine sugars were synthesized from sugar-functionalized
diamines with HDI. We evaluated the blood compatibilities of the polyurea glycopolymers
using aPTT, PT, and TT assays and the highest anticoagulant properties were seen in
sulfated mannose and lactose containing polymers. Having screened the four different
sugars, we now turned our attention to the influence of different diisocyanates (in other
words; chemical structure and backbone flexibility) and different degrees of sulfation (or
average number of sulfate groups per sugar) on anticoagulant properties. We synthesized
polyuria glycopolymers from lactose and mannose containing diamines and varied the
diisocyanate comonomers. Specifically, we used TDI, IPDI, HMDI and HDI. In order to

134

screen different degrees of sulfation we used lactose-containing monomer to polymerize
with HMDI. The blood compatibilities of the synthesized polyurea glycopolymers were
screened using aPTT, PT, and TT assays.
3.3.1

Polymer synthesis and characterization

Lactose and mannose containing diamines L-D-08 and M-D-08 (Figure 3.1) were
synthesized and named according to protocols in Chapter 2.28

Figure 3.1. Chemical structures of lactose and mannose-containing monomers L-D-08 and
M-D-08.

The polymerization of L-D-08 with TDI was performed in anhydrous DMF at 65 C for 40
h, as shown in Figure 3.2. The number average molecular weight (Mn), weight average
molecular weight (Mw) and polymer dispersity (PDI) were determined to be 10.8 kDa, 27.1
kDa, and 2.51, respectively (Table 3.1).

Figure 3.2. Synthetic route for poly(TDI-L-D), depro(TDI-L-D) and sulf(TDI-L-D).

135

Table 3.1. GPC data for the synthesized polyurea glycopolymers with different
diisocyanate backbonesa.
polymer

a

Mn (kDa)

Mw (kDa)

PDI

poly(TDI-L-D)

10.8

27.1

2.51

poly(IPDI-L-D)

12.3

15.2

1.24

poly(HMDI-L-D)

11.0

15.6

1.42

poly(HDI-L-D)

27.0

47.3

1.75

poly(TDI-M-D)

18.1

23.1

1.28

poly(IPDI-M-D)

52.8

62.2

1.18

poly(HMDI-M-D)

43.8

59.7

1.36

poly(HDI-M-D)

22.7

32.0

1.41

Data were collected using THF as the mobile phase at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min with

refractive index, viscometer and light scattering detectors.

The acetyl groups protecting the sugars in poly(TDI-L-D) were removed using a catalytic
amount of NaOMe in anhydrous methanol solution, producing the deprotected polymer,
depro(TDI-L-D). The disappearance of the CH3 signals at 1.96–2.15 ppm in the 1H NMR
spectrum indicated the successful deprotection of the acetyl groups, which was further
corroborated by 13C and DEPT-135 NMR spectra. Neither primary (CH3) nor quaternary
(C=O) carbon peaks were observed in either spectrum, indicating the removal of acetyl
groups from poly(TDI-L-D). The deprotection reaction did not cause any cleavage of the
urea groups, as evidenced by the existing peaks at 158.84 ppm for the carbonyl carbon
from urea functional groups and 102.87 and 102.37 ppm for the two anomeric-carbon peaks.

136

In the FT-IR spectrum of depro(TDI-L-D) the strong ester absorption peak at 1743 cm-1
disappeared, and a new broad strong peak at 3311 cm-1 was observed due to the free
hydroxyl functional groups (Figure 3.3). In addition, the urea carbonyl functional group
can still be observed at 1639 cm-1.

% Reflectance

sulf(TDI-L-D)

depro(TDI-L-D)

poly(TDI-L-D)

3750

3000

2250

1500

750

-1

Wavenumbers (cm )

Figure 3.3. FT-IR spectra for poly(TDI-L-D), depro(TDI-L-D) and sulf(TDI-L-D).

The conversion of hydroxyl groups to sulfate groups was achieved with a SO3/pyridine
complex in pyridine, producing the sulfated heparin-mimicking polymer sulf(TDI-L-D).
The observation of strong peaks at 1220, 999 and 931 cm-1 from the O=S=O group and the
C–O–S bonds in the FT-IR spectrum confirmed the successful sulfation reaction (Figure
3.3). The average degree of sulfation was calculated using elemental analysis to be 7.92

137

sulfate groups per lactose (Table 3.2). This value is higher than the theoretical maximum
value (7.0 sulfates per lactose), we believe that this “over sulfation” is due to sulfonation
of the electron rich phenyl ring.15
Table 3.2. Elemental analysis of the sulfated polymers.

a

polymer

carbon

hydrogen

nitrogen

sodium

sulfur

DSa

sulf(TDI-L-D)

15.80%

2.89%

1.59%

11.57%

17.13%

7.92

sulf(IPDI-L-D)

18.97%

3.54%

2.22%

10.85%

14.51%

6.02

sulf(HMDI-L-D)

21.86%

3.71%

2.35%

10.46%

15.44%

5.97

sulf (HDI-L-D)

18.08%

3.44%

2.36%

10.27%

15.42%

6.88

sulf(TDI-M-D)

21.57%

3.25%

3.62%

10.41%

15.47%

3.63

sulf(IPDI-M-D)

23.09%

4.00%

3.64%

10.16%

14.09%

3.43

sulf(HMDI-M-D)

24.25%

4.20%

3.39%

10.02%

13.98%

3.57

sulf(HDI-M-D)

19.57%

3.55%

3.63%

10.81%

16.45%

3.99

: DS = average degree of sulfation per disaccharide for lactose polymers and per

saccharide for mannose polymers

The same synthetic strategies were used to prepare polymers from L-D-08 with the
diisocyanates IPDI, HMDI and HDI, the chemical structures for the resulting polymers are
shown in Figure 3.4. This allowed us to investigate the effect of structural differences in
the polymer backbones on the anticoagulant properties of the polymers. The detailed
synthetic routes are collected in Experimental Section. The molecular weight data for the
lactose-containing polymers are reported in Table 3.1. After deprotection and sulfation, the
heparin mimicking polymers, sulf(IPDI-L-D), sulf(HMDI-L-D) and sulf(HDI-L-D), were

138

obtained. The average degree of sulfation (DS) was calculated to be 6.02, 5.97 and 6.88
per lactose respectively. Note that in each of these cases the DS is less than seven, giving
further credence to our hypothesis that the aromatic rings were sulfonated in sulf(TDI-LD).

Figure 3.4. Chemical structures for polymers from L-D-08 with IPDI, HMDI and HDI.

The same synthetic routes described for poly(TDI-L-D) were used for mannose containing
polymers from M-D-08 with the diisocyanates TDI, IPDI, HMDI and HDI (Figure 3.5).
Detailed synthesis protocols are collected in the Experimental Section.

Figure 3.5. Chemical structures for polymers from M-D with TDI, IPDI, HMDI and HDI.

139

The molecular weight data for the mannose-containing polymers are reported in Table 3.1.
The polymers were deprotected and sulfated to yield heparin-mimicking polymers with
average degrees of sulfation per saccharide calculated from elemental analysis (Table 3.2).

3.3.2

Contact angle measurements

As discussed in Chapter 2, hydrophilic surface can influence the blood compatibilities of
biomaterials,16 which can be measured by surface contact angles. In our cases, the
synthesized polymers were solvent-casted on Si wafer and used for contact angle
measurements, which includes the static, receding, and advancing contact angles as
collected in Table 3.3.
The acetyl-protected polymers had contact angles from 59º to 43º, higher than their
corresponding deprotected polymers, which were as expected due to the more polar
hydroxyl functional groups than acetyl functional groups. A close observation can also
found that higher contact angles were found for HMDI and IPDI containing polymers,
which can be attributed to their higher hydrophobic segments than that of TDI and HDI
segments. Measuring the contact angles for the sulfated polymers were failed due to the
complete wetting surface of the solvent-cast thin films, which were dissolved by water.
These high hydrophilicities of the sulfated polymer imply good candidacies for blood
compatible materials.
Table 3.3. Contact angle measurements of the synthesized polymers.
polymer

θ (deg) (static)

θ (deg) (advancing)

θ (deg) (receding)

poly(TDI-L-D)

47

35

53

poly(IPDI-L-D)

57

43

64

140

poly(HMDI-L-D)

56

45

60

poly(HDI-L-D)

43

31

49

depro(TDI-L-D)

42

24

51

depro(IPDI-L-D)

41

25

51

depro(HMDI-L-D)

47

32

53

depro(HDI-L-D)

30

20

45

poly(TDI-M-D)

48

35

56

poly(IPDI-M-D)

59

49

63

poly(HMDI-M-D)

57

47

61

poly(HDI-M-D)

47

40

54

depro(TDI-M-D)

42

25

52

depro(IPDI-M-D)

42

29

53

depro(HMDI-M-D)

48

33

57

depro(HDI-M-D)

33

26

45

3.3.3

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)

The glass transition temperatures (Tg) of the deprotected and sulfated polymers were
measured using DSC. The data from the second heating cycle were used to obtain glass
transition temperatures to avoid artifacts due to initial thermal treatment.17 The measured
glass transition temperatures are summarized in Table 3.4. As expected, the deprotected
polymers containing HDI and HMDI have lower Tg with values of 68 °C, 84 °C, 52 °C,
and 80 °C for depro(HDI-L-D), depro(HMDI-L-D), depro(HDI-M-D), and depro(HMDIM-D) respectively. The lower Tg values can be attributed to the flexible molecular

141

structures of HDI and HMDI segments.18 The more rigid TDI and IPDI containing
polymers have higher Tg values at 87 °C, 93 °C, 84 °C, and 88 °C for depro(TDI-L-D),
depro(IPDI-L-D), depro(TDI-M-D) and depro(IPDI-M-D) respectively. Interestingly, only
HDI-containing sulf(HDI-L-D) and sulf(HDI-M-D) sulfated polymers were found to
possess an observable Tg of 97 °C and 89 °C respectively; values far above those used in
the blood compatibility assays. No Tg values were recorded for the other sulfated polymers
before the onset of decomposition. Considering this, one might expect that if the effects
arising from the diisocyanate were purely driven by differences in polymer Tg there would
be no effect from the diisocyanate comonomer on blood compatibility. In other words, there
should be no change in blood compatibility with changing the diisocyanate if the blood
compatibility of the polymer resulting from the diisocyanate is due to bulk materials
properties. On the other hand, if the microscopic changes in polymer structure and
chemistry affect blood compatibility then changing the diisocyanate will still affect blood
compatibility, even after sulfation.

Table 3.4. Tg values of the deprotected and sulfated polymers. The absence of a value (N.A.)
reflects that no Tg was observed in the measurement.
polymer

Tg (ºC)

polymer

Tg (ºC)

depro(TDI-L-D)

87

depro(TDI-M-D)

84

depro(IPDI-L-D)

93

depro(IPDI-M-D)

88

depro(HMDI-L-D)

84

depro(HMDI-M-D)

80

depro(HDI-L-D)

68

depro(HDI-M-D)

52

sulf(TDI-L-D)

N.A.

sulf(TDI-M-D)

N.A.

142

sulf(IPDI-L-D)

N.A.

sulf(IPDI-M-D)

N.A.

sulf(HMDI-L-D)

N.A.

sulf(HMDI-M-D)

N.A.

sulf(HDI-L-D)

97

sulf(HDI-M-D)

89

3.3.4

Anticoagulant assays

aPTT assay is a standard clinical assay to characterize blood coagulation by detecting
abnormalities in hemostatic function of the intrinsic and common pathways.19 This is the
most widely used assay to monitor anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin. Wild-type
mouse plasma both with and without 1/10 volume HEPES buffered saline only was 28-30
s in this assay system. A prolonged aPTT is consistent with anticoagulant activities of our
synthesized polymers. No prolongation of the aPTT was observed with the deprotected
polymers as compared to HEPES buffered saline alone. The absolute values of the averaged
aPTTs for the sulfated polymers are collected in Table 3.5 and depicted in Figures 3.6 and
3.7, and they indicate prolonged aPTTs for all of the polymers studied. As the concentration
of the sulfated polymer increases, a corresponding increase in the prolongation of the aPTT
is observed. A typical aPTT for a therapeutic concentration of heparin is between 75-115s.
All the sulfated polymers tested exhibited aPTT values in and above this range at polymer
concentrations of 50 µg/mL, except sulf(TDI-M-D) which is gave an aPTT time of 64 s.

Table 3.5. aPTT assay values of sulfated polymers at various concentrations. The data are
an average of duplicate measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5 seconds.
polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

143

50

500

sulf(TDI-L-D)

33.0

46.0

104.0

>300

sulf(IPDI-L-D)

31.0

48.0

170.0

>300

sulf(HMDI-L-D)

31.0

48.5

>300

>300

sulf(HDI-L-D)

27.0

39.5

144.5

>300

sulf(TDI-M-D)

30.5

37.5

64.0

>300

sulf(IPDI-M-D)

32.0

47.0

>300

>300

sulf(HMDI-M-D)

30.0

39.0

235.0

>300

sulf(HDI-M-D)

31.5

41.5

188.0

>300

300

sulf(HDI-L-D)
sulf(HMDI-L-D)
sulf(TDI-L-D)
sulf(IPDI-L-D)

250

aPTT (s)

200

150

100

50

0
0.1

1

10

100

1000

concentration(g/mL)

Figure 3.6. aPTT results for the sulfated lactose containing polyurea glycopolymers at
various concentrations.

144

300

aPTT (s)

250

sulf(HDI-M-D)
sulf(HMDI-M-D)
sulf(TDI-M-D)
sulf(IPDI-M-D)

200

150

100

50

0
0.1

1

10

100

1000

concentration(g/mL)

Figure 3.7. aPTT results for the sulfated mannose containing polyurea glycopolymers at
various concentrations.

These results are consistent with the results in Chapter 214b and comparable with reported
results.20 For example, a sulfated lactose/acrylamide copolymer exhibited aPTTs of 100 s
and 200 s at concentrations of 79.9 and 184.0 g/mL respectively.34 A similar result was
observed by Hsieh-Wilson’s group,20a who used a novel glycopolymer at a concentration
of 150 g/mL to attain an aPTT of 119.4 ± 0.5 s. Inspecting Figures 3.6 and 3.7 we see
HMDI and IPDI based polymers gave better anticoagulant properties than HDI and TDI
based polymers. We hypothesize that these results might be attributed to these polymers
possessing “moderate” flexibilities, compared to flexible polymers from HDI and rigid
polymers from TDI. Our polymers appear to show an anti-FIIa activity rather than anti-

145

FXa;14b therefore it is possible the HMDI and IPDI containing polymers possess enough
flexibility to adopt a binding competent conformation for ATIII and thrombin with enough
rigidity to maintain that conformation. More mechanistic studies are clearly required to
parse the mechanism of action of our polymers with respect to their anticoagulant activities.
These studies are ongoing in our lab.
The blood compatibility of our polymers were further investigated using PT and TT assays,
which corroborated the anticoagulant properties of sulf(HMDI-L-D) and sulf(IPDI-M-D).
The results are collected in Table 3.6 for PT results and Table 3.7 for TT results.

Table 3.6. PT assay values of sulfated polymers at various concentrations. The data are an
average of duplicate measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5 seconds.
polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(TDI-L-D)

14.0

14.5

14.0

> 60

sulf(IPDI-L-D)

14.5

14.0

> 60

> 60

sulf(HMDI-L-D)

14.0

14.0

> 60

> 60

sulf(HDI-L-D)

14.5

13.0

> 60

> 60

sulf(TDI-M-D)

14.5

14.0

15.5

> 60

sulf(IPDI-M-D)

14.0

14.5

> 60

> 60

sulf(HMDI-M-D)

13.5

14.0

15.5

> 60

sulf(HDI-M-D)

14.0

14.0

> 60

> 60

The deprotected polymers exhibited no anticoagulant activities in the PT assay at any

146

concentration. The sulfated mannose-containing polymers prepared with IPDI and HDI
gave anticoagulant activities at lower concentrations than those prepared with HMDI and
TDI, while all the sulfated lactose-containing polymers exhibited anticoagulant activity at
a concentration of 50 g/mL in this assay except sulf(TDI-L-D). In the TT assay a HEPES
buffer solution with wild-type mouse plasma was used as a negative control (the same
negative control was used in the PT assay) with a TT of 21 s, and 0.1 – 0.7 IU/mL heparin
solutions were used as positive controls, all of which demonstrated TTs of >75 s. TT assay
is known to be exquisitely sensitive to heparin inhibition.21 Therefore, unsurprisingly, the
results from this assay (Table 3.7) were binary in nature, while the deprotected polymers
exhibited no anticoagulant activities; there was no discrimination among the sulfated
polymers as they all afforded TTs of >75s at concentrations of 5.0 g/mL and above.

Table 3.7. TT assay values of sulfated polymers at various concentrations. The data are an
average of duplicate measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5 seconds.
polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(TDI-L-D)

24.5

> 75

> 75

> 75

sulf(IPDI-L-D)

24.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

sulf(HMDI-L-D)

26.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

sulf(HDI-L-D)

25.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

sulf(TDI-M-D)

24.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

sulf(IPDI-M-D)

25.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

sulf(HMDI-M-D)

23.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

147

sulf(HDI-M-D)

3.3.5

22.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

Effect of the average degree of sulfation on anticoagulant activity.

Having explored the effect of the sugar and the diisocyanate on the blood compatibility of
our polymers, we turned our attention to the other main structural feature of our polymers
– the degree of sulfation. All of the polymers we have prepared to date have been heavily
sulfated, but this leads to questions of do we really need such a high level of sulfation?
This question is motivated in part by the pharmaceutical heparin contamination issue where
the contaminant was discovered to be an oversulfated chondroitin sulfate. The problem is
made more confounding by the varying percentage of sulfur seen in different heparin and
heparin mimicking systems. For example, unfractionated heparin was reported to have
sulfate percentages from 25.1 % to 40.7 %.22 The sulfate content of low molecular weight
heparins range from 30.3 % to 39.0 %.22c The sulfur content of ultra-low molecular weight
heparin, Arixtra, can be calculated as 14.8 %. The sulfur contents of oversulfated
chondroitin sulfate and oversulfated dermatan sulfate have been analyzed to be 14.4 % and
12.5 %, which is a degree of sulfation of 3 to 4 sulfates or 2 to 3 sulfates per saccharide
respectively.22b, 23 The Akashi group,24 demonstrated that blood clotting time trends with
the degree of sulfation of a poly(glucosyloxyethyl methacrylate) sulfate heparinmimicking polymer. Similar results are seen elsewhere in the literature.24-25 Therefore,
correlating the degree of sulfation of our polymers with their biological response is an
important task.
We prepared glycopolymers using the lactose-containing monomer with HMDI to explore
the effects of degree of sulfation. This enabled us to tune the degree of sulfation over a

148

wider range compared to using mannose-based monomers. We were able to prepare
polymers with different degrees of sulfation by controlling the stoichiometric amount of
the SO3/pyridine complex we used and performing the reaction in DMF at room
temperature for 24 h. The equivalents of sulfation reagent and the measured degree of
sulfation by elemental analysis are summarized in Table 3.8.

Table 3.8. Sulfation of depro(HMDI-L-D) with different equivalents of the sulfation
reagent and the measured degree of sulfation by elemental analysis. (The numbers after the
polymer name, i.e. 0.57, 1.60, 3.20, 4.44 and 5.97, represent the degree of sulfation of these
sulfated polymers).

a

polymer

SO3·pyr. a

carbon

hydrogen

nitrogen

sulfur

DSc

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57

2.0

43.82%

6.80%

5.04%

2.95%

0.57

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-1.60

6.0

28.75%

4.77%

3.22%

5.44%

1.60

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-3.20

8.0

22.99%

4.01%

2.59%

8.72%

3.20

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-4.44

10.0

21.00%

3.69%

2.34%

11.04%

4.44

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97

3.0b

21.86%

3.71%

2.35%

15.44%

5.97

: equivalents of sulfation reagent per lactose unit in DMF solution used in the reaction for

24 hours at room temperature;
b

: equivalents of sulfation reagent per hydroxyl group in pyridine solution used in the

reaction for 24 hours at 90 C;
c

: average degree of sulfation per lactose unit.

As can be seen in Table 3.8, we obtained five polymers with percent sulfur ranging from

149

approximately 3 to 15 %, or an average degree of sulfation of 0.57 to 5.97 sulfates per
lactose. We did not attempt to measure the Tg of these polymers considering that the parent
deprotected polymer was already observed to possess a Tg of 84 °C (Table 3.4), far above
the temperature used in the assay. We used the aPTT assay to test the anticoagulant effect
of the average degree of sulfation of the sugars on the blood compatibility of the polymers
(Table 3.9 and Figure 3.8). While prolonged clotting times can be observed for all
glycopolymers except for sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57 at the highest polymer concentration of
500 µg/mL, only two sulfated polymers extended clotting times to 150s or longer at
concentrations of 50 µg/mL. In our experimental design we considered “good” clotting
times to be above 100s, as this would be consistent with therapeutic anticoagulation. The
order of anticoagulant activity correlates with the average degree of sulfation, i.e.
sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97 > sulf(HMDI-L-D)-4.44 > sulf(HMDI-L-D)-3.20 > sulf(HMDI-LD)-1.60 > sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57.

Table 3.9. aPTT assay values of sulfated glycopolymers from L-D-08 and HMDI with
different degrees of sulfation at various concentrations. The data are an average of duplicate
measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5 seconds.
polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57

29.0

29.5

28.0

37.5

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-1.60

29.0

28.0

42.0

>300

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-3.20

29.0

35.0

77.5

>300

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-4.44

30.0

41.0

145.5

>300

150

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97

300

aPTT (s)

250

31.0

48.5

>300

>300

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57
sulf(HMDI-L-D)-1.60
sulf(HMDI-L-D)-3.20
sulf(HMDI-L-D)-4.44
sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97

200

150

100

50

0
0.1

1

10

100

1000

concentration(g/mL)

Figure 3.8. aPTT of sulfated glycopolymers from L-D-08 and HMDI with different
degrees of sulfation at various concentrations.

The prothrombin time (PT) and thrombin time (TT) assays were performed to further probe
the blood-compatibility of the sulfated glycocopolymers from L-D-08 and HMDI with
increasing degrees of sulfation, and the results are collected in Table 3.10 and 3.11. Clotting
times of 15s and 21s respectively were observed with a HEPES buffer solution as a
negative control in these assays. Unlike the aPTT assay where the three highest sulfated
glycopolymers, sulf(HMDI-L-D)-3.20, sulf(HMDI-L-D)-4.44 and sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97,
exhibited prolonged prothrombin time at the polymer concentration of 50 µg/mL, in the

151

PT assay only the highest sulfated polymer, sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97, extended clotting time
at 50 µg/mL.

Table 3.10. PT assay values of sulfated glycopolymers from L-D-08 and HMDI with
different degrees of sulfation at various concentrations. The data are an average of duplicate
measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5 seconds.
polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57

15.0

15.0

14.5

15.0

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-1.60

15.0

13.5

15.5

20.0

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-3.20

14.0

15.0

19.0

>60

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-4.44

14.0

14.5

17.5

>60

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97

14.0

14.0

>60

>60

The TT assay results are qualitatively similar to the aPTT assay. All of the sulfated
polymers extended clotting times beyond the upper limit of the assay at the highest
concentration except sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57. At a concentration of 50 µg/mL the three
highest sulfated glycopolymers extended clotting times in the TT assay, while sulf(HMDIL-D)-5.97 was also able to extend clotting times at 5 µg/mL.

Table 3.11. PT assay values of sulfated glycopolymers from L-D-08 and HMDI with
different degrees of sulfation at various concentrations. The data are an average of duplicate
measurements and reported to the nearest 0.5 seconds.

152

polymer concentration (g/mL)
polymer
0.5

5.0

50

500

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-0.57

22.0

24.5

24.5

37.0

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-1.60

20.0

22.0

32.0

>60

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-3.20

26.0

24.5

>60

>60

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-4.44

21.0

26.0

>60

>60

sulf(HMDI-L-D)-5.97

26.0

> 75

> 75

> 75

3.4 Conclusions
While all highly sulfated polymers exhibited prolonged aPTT clotting times, the best
results with lactose and mannose containing polymers were found to be with HMDI and
IPDI comonomers respectively. The anticoagulant activities may be attributed to the
relatively flexible HMDI and IPDI containing polymers as compared with flexible HDI
and rigid TDI containing polymers. However, this result does not correlate directly with
the Tg of the polymers, as the glass transition temperatures of the polymers tested in aPTT
assays were all well above the temperature of the assays. Therefore, the results of this study
show that the chemistry of the polymer repeat units at a molecular level is at least as
important to the biocompatibility of the polymer as bulk material properties are.

3.5 Experimental section
3.5.1

Materials and instruments

All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich except lactose (Matherson Coleman &
Bell Co). Pre-treated standard grade, regenerated cellulose dialysis membrane with an

153

approximate molecular weight cut off (MWCO) of 3.5 kDa was obtained from
SpectrumLabs.
1

H and 13C NMR spectroscopy was performed using a Bruker Ultrashield 400 MHz (100

MHz for 13C NMR) instrument. The obtained data were processed using MestReNova
software (version 6.1.0). Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR) were collected on a
Nicolet 6700 spectrometer and analyzed with OMNIC32 software. Mass spectrometry was
performed using a Micromass Q-TOF-2TM spectrometer. Galbraith Laboratories Inc.
performed elemental analyses. Molecular weight averages of polymers were determined
using gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC equipped
with a PSS SDV Lux column (5 μm) guard column and two PSS SDV Linear XL Lux
Columns (5 μm) (linear range of MW = 100 – 3 × 106 g/mol), using a filtered tetrahydrofuran
(THF) containing 200 ppm 2,6-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-4-methylphenol (BHT) mobile
phase at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min at ambient temperature and miniDAWN TREOS light
scattering (60 mW GaAs linearly polarized laser, 658 nm), Optilab rEX differential
refractometer (light source = 658 nm; Wyatt Technology Corporation) and ViscoStar-II
viscometer (Model NO: WV2-03, Wyatt Technology Corporation) detectors. The polymers
were dissolved in eluent THF and filtered through 0.2 μm membrane filters before injection.
ASTRA software v. 5.4.14 was used to determine the molecular weight averages and
polydispersity.
3.5.2

Polymer synthesis

Synthesis of lactose and mannose based diamines
The synthetic route for lactose and mannose based diamines (L-D-08 and M-D-08 in Figure
4.1) is reported in Chapter 2.14b

154

Synthesis of poly(TDI-L-D)

L-D-08 (2.852 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for three times, 10 mL anhydrous DMF was injected under nitrogen
protection, following by TDI (0.376 g, 1.05 equiv.). This solution was stirred at 65 C for
40 hours before removing DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM,
and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum
to yield 3.110 g product as a white powder in 95 % yield.
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.03 (m, 3 H, =CH), 5.34 (s, 2 H, d-H), 5.17 (m, 2

H, c’-H), 5.09 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.98 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.89 (m, 2 H, b’-H), 4.51 (m,
6 H, a-H, a’-H, f’-Ha), 4.12–4.07 (m, 6 H, f-H, g-Ha), 3.90–3.45 (m, 18 H, e-H, g-Hb, d’H, e’-H, f’-Hb, h-H, 1-H), 2.15, 2.04, 1.96 (3 × s, 45 H, 15 × CH3)
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.19 (CH3C=O), 170.02 (CH3C=O), 169.90

(CH3C=O), 169.56 (CH3C=O), 168.98 (CH3C=O), 156.41 (C-2, C-10), 137.37 (C-3, C-4,
C-7), 130.10 (C-5), 117.04, 116.40 (C-6, C-8), 100.89 (C-a, C-a’), 76.11 (C-d), 72.76 (Cb), 71.30 (C-c’), 70.84 (C-c), 70.45 (C-b’), 69.01 (C-e’), 66.55 (C-e), 65.69 (C-d’), 61.92
(C-f), 60.64 (C-f’), 53.55 (C-g), 48.66 (C-1, C-h), 20.67,20.52 (CH3C=O), 17.47 (C-9)
155

FT-IR: (cm-1) 2940, 1743, 1661, 1531, 1427, 1367, 1213, 1040, 900
Synthesis of depro(TDI-L-D)

In a flame-dried flask, poly(TDI-L-D) (3.00 g) was dissolved in 40 mL anhydrous methanol
and 10 mL anhydrous THF, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH
solution. This solution was stirred at r.t. for 2.5 h with the formation of a precipitate. The
solvent was poured into a beaker and the precipitate washed with MeOH that was then
combined with the original solvent. Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added to the
MeOH to adjust the pH to around 6.0. After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin,
the solvent was removed and combined with the precipitate to get product 1.78 g (94 %).
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.03 (m, 3 H, =CH), 4.39–3.32 (m, 4 H, d-H, c’-H),

3.82–3.47 (m, 36 H, a-H, b-H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H),
2.07 (s, 3 H, 9-H)
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 130.58 (C-5), 102.84 (C-a), 102.37 (C-a’), 78.28
(C-d), 75.20 (C-b), 74.59 (C-c’), 74.37 (C-c), 72.70 (C-b’), 72.48 (C-e’), 70.77 (C-e), 68.42
(C-d’), 60.86 (C-f), 60.01 (C-f’), 16.73 (C-9)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.84 (C-2, C-10), 136.27 (C-3, C-4, C-7), 130.55

156

(C-5), 119.70,119.07 (C-6, C-8), 102.87 (C-a), 102.37 (C-a’), 78.34 (C-d), 75.22 (C-b),
74.61 (C-c’), 74.40 (C-c), 72.71 (C-b’), 72.51 (C-e’), 70.79 (C-e), 68.45 (C-d’), 60.88 (Cf), 60.04 (C-f’), 47.43,45.78 (C-1, C-h), 16.75 (C-9)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3311, 2881, 1639, 1526, 1494, 1372, 1236, 1020
Synthesis of sulf(TDI-L-D)

Depro(TDI-L-D) (0.82 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (5.44 g, 42.0 equiv.) was
added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times,
15 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. The reaction was heated at 90 C for 24 h. After
removing the solvent, a saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to 8.0 and
the polymer isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white foam product. Yield
= 1.80 g, 91 %.
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 8.82–7.12 (m, 3 H, =CH), 5.19 (s, 2 H, d-H), 5.05–

5.00 (m, 2 H, c’-H), 4.89 (m, 2 H, b-H), 4.49–3.46 (m, 34 H, a-H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H,
a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H), 2.33 (s, 3 H, 9-H)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 157.21 (C-2, C-10), 145.21 (C-3, C-4, C-7), 128.19

(C-5), 101.09, 100.83 (C-a), 100.28 (C-a’), 78.02, 77.84, 77.66 (C-d), 77.25 (C-b), 75.88,
157

75.70 (C-c’), 75.27 (C-c), 74.97 (C-b’), 73.27 (C-e’), 73.09 (C-e), 72.00 (C-d’), 69.12 (Cg), 66.89, 66.66, 66.16 (C-f), 65.08 (C-f’), 47.33, 46.50, 46.24 (C-h, C-1), 16.72 (C-9)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3481, 1634, 1220, 999, 931, 799
Synthesis of poly(IPDI-L-D)

L-D-08 (2.90 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen three times, 10 mL of anhydrous DMF was injected under nitrogen
protection followed by IPDI (0.489 g, 1.05 equiv.). This solution was stirred at 65 C for
40 h before removing the DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM
and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum
to yield 3.26 g product as a white powder in 95 % yield
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.35 (s, 2 H, d-H), 5.18 (m, 2 H, c’-H), 5.10 (t, J =

8.0 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.98–4.96 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.86 (m, 2 H, b’-H), 4.51 (m, 6 H, a-H, a’-H,
f’-Ha), 4.12–4.09 (m, 6 H, f-H, g-Ha), 3.90 (m, 4 H, e-H, f’-Hb), 3.80 (m, 2 H, d’-H), 3.64
(m, 4 H, g-Hb, e’-H), 3.40–3.11 (m, 11 H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 2.15, 2.12, 2.05, 2.01, 1.97
(6 × s, 42 H, 14 × CH3), 1.69 (m, 2 H, 8-H), 1.06–0.93 (m, 13 H, 4-H, 6-H, 9-H, 10-H)

158

13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.00 (CH3C=O), 169.85 (CH3C=O), 169.72

(CH3C=O), 169.37 (CH3C=O), 168.79 (CH3C=O), 158.60, 157.82 (C-2, C-12), 100.71 (Ca, C-a’), 75.99 (C-d), 72.55 (C-b), 71.23 (C-c’), 70.68 (C-c), 70.32 (C-b’), 68.85 (C-e’),
66.40 (C-e), 65.51 (C-d’), 61.70 (C-f), 60.53 (C-f’), 48.24, 48.02, 47.40, 46.85, 45.72,
43.93 (C-1, C-3, C-11, C-h), 35.04, 31.62 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8), 27.51 (C-9), 22.99 (C10), 20.36 (CH3C=O)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1743, 1634, 1531, 1366, 1212, 1039, 900
Synthesis of depro(IPDI-L-D)

In a flame-dried flask, poly(IPDI-L-D) (3.00 g) was dissolved in 40 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at room temperature (r.t.) for 2.5 h with the formation of precipitation. The
solvent was poured into a beaker. MeOH was used to wash the precipitate and combined
with the original solvent. Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the solvent
to adjust pH around 6.0. After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the solvent
was removed to yield the product. This product is combined with the precipitate to obtain
159

1.85 g product in 96 % yield
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.40 (m, 4 H, d-H, c’-H), 3.88–3.52 (m, 39 H, a-H, b-

H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 1.58 (m, 2 H, 8H), 1.01–0.91 (m, 13 H, 4-H, 6-H, 9-H, 10-H)
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 102.91 (C-a), 102.33 (C-a’), 78.40 (C-d), 75.27 (Cb), 74.70 (C-c’), 74.44 (C-c), 72.78 (C-b’), 72.51 (C-e’), 70.85 (C-e), 68.47 (C-d’), 60.92
(C-f), 60.10 (C-f’)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.80, 159.03 (C-2, C-12), 102.95 (C-a), 102.36 (C-

a’), 78.46 (C-d), 75.30 (C-b), 74.73 (C-c’), 74.48 (C-c), 72.81 (C-b’), 72.55 (C-e’), 70.89
(C-e), 68.50 (C-d’), 60.95 (C-f), 60.14 (C-f’), 47.49, 46.81, 46.36 (C-h, C-1, C-11), 44.27
(C-3), 36.50, 35.30, 31.59 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8), 27.77 (C-9), 23.26 (C-10)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3328, 2890, 1622, 1532, 1365, 1245, 1021
Synthesis of sulf(IPDI-L-D)

Depro(IPDI-L-D) (0.82 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (5.22 g, 42.0 equiv.) was
added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times,
15 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. It was heated at 90 C for 24 h. After the solvent
160

was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to 8.0 and the
polymer was isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give white foam product. Yield
= 1.84 g, 95 %
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.23 (s, 2 H, d-H), 4.99–4.93 (m, 4 H, c’-H, b-H),

4.67–3.62 (m, 37 H, a-H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H, 3-H,
11-H), 1.76 (m, 2 H, 8-H), 1.19–1.10 (m, 13 H, 4-H, 6-H, 9-H, 10-H)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 160.04, 159.03 (C-2, C-12), 101.00 (C-a), 100.77 (C-

a’), 77.77 (C-b, C-d), 77.30 (C-c’), 75.84 (C-c), 75.60 (C-b’), 75.23 (C-e, C-e’), 73.19 (Cd’), 71.89 (C-g), 68.29 (C-f), 66.60 (C-f’), 46.91, 45.99 (C-h, C-1, C-11), 44.54 (C-3), 36.64,
34.79, 31.48 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8), 27.20 (C-9), 22.91 (C-10)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3480, 2953, 1630, 1538, 1221, 999
Synthesis of poly(HMDI-L-D)

L-D-08 (2.870 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for three times, 10 mL anhydrous DMF was injected under nitrogen
protection, followed by HMDI (0.634 g, 1.05 equiv., 90 % purity). This solution was stirred

161

at 65 C for 40 h before removing the DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum
amount of DCM, and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed
under vacuum to yield 3.320 g product as a white powder in 96 % yield
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.35 (s, 2 H, d-H), 5.18 (m, 2 H, c’-H), 5.10 (t, J =

8.0 Hz, 2 H, b-H), 4.98–4.95 (m, 2 H, c-H), 4.86 (m, 2 H, b’-H), 4.50 (m, 6 H, a-H, a’-H,
f’-Ha), 4.13–4.04 (m, 6 H, f-H, g-Ha), 3.89 (m, 4 H, e-H, f’-Hb), 3.81–3.77 (m, 2 H, d’-H),
3.64 (m, 4 H, g-Hb, e’-H), 3.44–3.11 (m, 10 H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 2.15, 2.12, 2.06, 2.05,
2.01, 1.97 (6 × s, 42 H, 14 × CH3), 1.73–1.54, 1.27–0.97 (m, 20 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H, 8H, 9-H, 10-H)
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.08 (CH3C=O), 169.91 (CH3C=O), 169.80

(CH3C=O), 169.44 (CH3C=O), 168.84 (CH3C=O), 157.76 (C-2, C-12), 100.77 (C-a),
100.49 (C-a’), 75.97 (C-d), 72.66 (C-b), 71.20 (C-c’), 70.71 (C-c), 70.38 (C-b’), 68.90 (Ce’), 66.42 (C-e), 65.58 (C-d’), 61.77 (C-f), 60.56 (C-f’), 50.02 (C-g), 48.18, 46.90, 46.64,
45.77 (C-1, C-3, C-11, C-h), 33.61, 33.17, 32.15, 31.94, 29.54, 27.93, 27.33 (C-4, C-5, C6, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10), 20.59, 20.42 (CH3C=O)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2927, 1742, 1634, 1526, 1366, 1212, 1038, 890
Synthesis of depro(HMDI-L-D)

162

In a flame-dried flask, poly(HMDI-L-D) (3.10 g) was dissolved in 40 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at r.t. for 2.5 h with the formation of precipitation. The solvent was poured into
a beaker. MeOH was used to wash the precipitate and combined with the original solvent.
Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the solvent to adjust pH around 6.0.
After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the solvent was removed to yield the
product. This product was combined with the precipitate to get 1.93 g product in 96 % yield
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 4.42 (m, 4 H, d-H, c’-H), 3.90–3.54 (m, 38 H, a-H, b-

H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 1.83–0.90 (br,
20 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H)
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 102.96 (C-a), 102.39 (C-a’), 78.52 (C-d), 75.30 (Cb), 74.74 (C-c’), 74.48 (C-c), 72.80 (C-b’), 72.53 (C-e’), 70.87 (C-e), 68.47 (C-d’), 60.93
(C-f), 60.16 (C-f’)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.84 (C-2, C-12), 102.99 (C-a), 102.43 (C-a’),

78.57 (C-d), 75.33 (C-b), 74.76 (C-c’), 74.53 (C-c), 72.85 (C-b’), 72.56 (C-e’), 70.90 (Ce), 68.50 (C-d’), 60.96 (C-f), 60.22 (C-f’), 47.61, 46.68 (C-1, C-3, C-11, C-h), 33.78, 33.40,
163

32.21, 31.70, 29.84, 29.14, 28.71 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3330, 2918, 1615, 1530, 1447, 1406, 1367, 1249, 1023
Synthesis of sulf(HMDI-L-D)

Depro(HMDI-L-D) (0.80 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (4.91 g, 42.0 equiv.)
was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three
times, 15 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. It was heated at 90 C for 24 h. After the
solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to 8.0 and
the polymer was isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give white foam product.
Yield = 1.71 g, 92 %
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.19 (s, 2 H, d-H), 4.96–4.88 (m, 4 H, c’-H, b-H),

4.62–3.55 (m, 36 H, a-H, c-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, a’-H, b’-H, d’-H, e’-H, f’-H, 1-H, 3-H,
11-H), 1.97–1.02 (m, 20 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.08 (C-2, C-12), 101.03 (C-a), 100.71, 99.91 (C-

a’), 77.66 (C-b, C-d), 77.25 (C-c’), 75.82 (C-c), 75.54 (C-b’), 75.21 (C-e, C-e’), 73.31 (Cd’), 71.89 (C-g), 68.14 (C-f), 66.55 (C-f’), 50.77, 47.27, 46.76, 46.12 (C-h, C-1, C-3, C11), 33.02, 32.16, 29.92, 29.58, 29.09, 28.19 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10)

164

FT-IR: (cm-1) 3486, 2925, 1630, 1537, 1225, 1053, 1006
Synthesis of poly(HDI-L-D), depro(HDI-L-D) and sulf(HDI-L-D)
The detailed synthesis procedures, as well as the spectra, can be found from the
Experimental Section of Chapter 2.14b
Synthesis of poly(TDI-M-D)

M-D-08 (3.03 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for three times, 15 mL anhydrous DMF was injected under nitrogen
protection, followed by TDI (0.685 g, 1.05 equiv.). This solution was stirred at 65 C for
40 h before removing the DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM,
and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum
to yield 3.60 g product as a white powder in 98 % yield
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.68 (m, 3 H, =CH), 7.02 (br, 2 H, NH), 5.28 (m, 6

H, b-H, c-H, d-H), 4.92 (m, 2 H, a-H), 4.27–3.61 (m, 18 H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, 1-H), 2.13,
2.06, 2.05, 1.97 (4 × s, 27 H, 9 × CH3)
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.23 (CH3C=O), 169.54 (C=O), 169.32 (C=O),

155.89, 155.53 (C-2, C-10), 137.48, 136.58, 136.20 (C-3, C-4, C-7), 129.81 (C-5), 117.04,

165

116.31 (C-6, C-8), 97.19 (C-a), 69.00 (C-c), 68.66 (C-e), 68.26 (C-b), 67.04 (C-d), 65.38
(C-g), 62.02 (C-f), 48.25 (C-h), 45.52 (C-1), 20.29 (CH3C=O), 17.21 (C-9)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1741, 1642, 1529, 1367, 1213, 1135, 1083, 1038, 977
Synthesis of depro(TDI-M-D)

In a flame-dried flask, poly(TDI-M-D) (3.50 g) was dissolved in 30 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at r.t. for 2.5 h with the formation of precipitation. The solvent was poured into
a beaker. MeOH was used to wash the precipitate and combined with the original solvent.
Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the solvent to adjust pH around 6.0.
After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the solvent was removed to yield the
product. This product was combined with the precipitate to get 2.20 g product in 95 % yield
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.21–7.14 (m, 3 H, =CH), 3.89–3.61 (m, 26 H, a-H, b-

H, c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, 1-H), 2.14 (s, 3 H, 9-H)
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 130.57 (C-5), 119.59 (C-6, C-8), 99.70 (C-a), 72.77
(C-c), 70.57 (C-e), 69.93 (C-b), 66.51 (C-d), 65.38 (C-g), 60.70 (C-f), 47.42 (C-h, C-1),
16.72 (C-9)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 157.75, 157.47 (C-2, C-10), 136.22 (C-3, C-4, C-7),
166

130.60 (C-5), 119.04 (C-6, C-8), 99.70 (C-a), 72.80 (C-c), 70.60 (C-e), 69.96 (C-b), 66.54
(C-d), 65.44 (C-g), 60.73 (C-f), 47.07 (C-h, C-1), 16.74 (C-9)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3296, 2914, 1638, 1526, 1494, 1420, 1234, 1131, 1020
Synthesis of sulf(TDI-M-D)

Depro(TDI-M-D) (1.18 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (6.95 g, 24.0 equiv.) was
added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times,
20 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. It was heated at 90 C for 24 h. After the solvent
was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to 8.0 and the
polymer was isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white powder. Yield =
2.48 g, 93 %
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 7.49 (m, 3 H, =CH), 5.42 (m, 2 H, c-H), 5.15 (m, 2 H,

b-H), 4.97 (m, 2 H, d-H), 4.70–3.53 (m, 20 H, a-H, e-H, f-H, g-H, h-H, 1-H), 2.39 (s, 3 H,
9-H)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.23 (C-2, C-10), 136.68 (C-3, C-4, C-7), 97.33 (C-

a), 75.35 (C-c), 73.98 (C-e), 71.71 (C-b), 69.51 (C-d), 67.01 (C-g), 66.36 (C-f), 47.19 (Ch, C-1), 17.36, 16.84 (C-9)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3452, 1637, 1530, 1222, 1047, 1010
167

Synthesis of poly(IPDI-M-D)

M-D-08 (3.01 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for three times, 15 mL anhydrous DMF was injected under nitrogen
protection, followed by IPDI (0.869 g, 1.05 equiv.). This solution was stirred at 65 C for
40 h before removing the DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum amount of DCM,
and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed under vacuum
to yield 3.71 g product as a white powder in 96 % yield
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.29–5.27 (m, 6 H, b-H, c-H, d-H), 4.86 (m, 2 H, a-

H), 4.30–4.28 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.11–4.08 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.94–3.40 (m, 17 H, e-H, g-H, h-H,
1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 2.14, 2.10, 2.06, 1.97 (4 × s, 24 H, 8 × CH3), 1.73–1.70 (m, 2 H, 8-H),
1.07–0.92 (m, 13 H, 4-H, 6-H, 9-H, 10-H)
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.15 (CH3C=O), 169.50 (C=O), 169.21 (C=O),

158.31, 157.52 (C-2, C-12), 97.31 (C-a), 68.71 (C-c), 68.30 (C-e), 67.86 (C-b), 67.52 (Cd), 65.39 (C-g), 61.97 (C-f), 47.05, 45.83, 43.96, 41.98 (C-h, C-1, C-3, C-11), 34.85, 31.54
(C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8), 27.44 (C-9), 22.98 (C-10), 20.35 (CH3C=O)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2946, 1742, 1631, 1530, 1366, 1215, 1135, 1083, 1039, 977;
Synthesis of depro(IPDI-M-D)
168

In a flame-dried flask, poly(IPDI-M-D) (3.70 g) was dissolved in 30 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at r.t. for 2.5 h with the formation of precipitation. The solvent was poured into
a beaker. MeOH was used to wash the precipitate and combined with the original solvent.
Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the solvent to adjust pH around 6.0.
After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the solvent was removed to yield the
product. This product was combined with the precipitate to get 2.40 g product in 96 % yield
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 3.93–3.54 (m, 29 H, a-H, b-H, c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, g-

H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 1.65 (m, 2 H, 8-H), 1.07–0.95 (m, 13 H, 4-H, 6-H, 9-H, 10-H)
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 99.75 (C-a), 72.83 (C-c), 70.72 (C-e), 70.04 (C-b),
66.67 (C-d), 65.88 (C-g), 60.84 (C-f), 47.26, 46.28 (C-h, C-1, C-11), 44.26 (C-3), 27.57
(C-9), 23.12 (C-10)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.72, 158.75 (C-2, C-12), 99.78 (C-a), 72.86 (C-c),

70.74 (C-e), 70.07 (C-b), 66.69 (C-d), 65.92 (C-g), 60.87 (C-f), 47.46, 46.98 (C-h, C-1, C11), 44.25 (C-3), 36.55 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8), 27.70 (C-9), 23.03 (C-10)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3332, 2905, 1620, 1534, 1364, 1241, 1131, 1023, 974
Synthesis of sulf(IPDI-M-D)
169

Depro(IPDI-M-D) (1.21 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (6.63 g, 24.0 equiv.) was
added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three times,
20 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. It was heated at 90 C for 24 h. After the solvent
was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to 8.0 and the
polymer was isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white powder. Yield =
2.43 g, 92 %
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.34 (m, 2 H, c-H), 5.09 (m, 2 H, b-H), 4.87 (m, 2 H,

d-H), 4.64 (m, 4 H, a-H, f-Ha), 4.41 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 4.08–3.19 (m, 17 H, e-H, g-H, h-H, 1H, 3-H, 11-H), 1.81–1.72 (m, 2 H, 8-H), 1.37–1.13 (m, 13 H, 4-H, 6-H, 9-H, 10-H)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 159.76, 158.62 (C-2, C-12), 97.26 (C-a), 75.27 (C-c),

73.93 (C-e), 71.61 (C-b), 69.73 (C-d), 67.00 (C-f, C-g), 46.97, 46.24 (C-h, C-1, C-11),
44.63 (C-3), 36.81, 34.77, 31.53 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8), 27.27 (C-9), 23.15 (C-10)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3453, 2922, 1629, 1537, 1223, 1050, 1011
Synthesis of poly(HMDI-M-D)

170

M-D-08 (3.03 g, 1.0 equiv.) was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and
refilling with nitrogen for three times, 15 mL anhydrous DMF was injected under nitrogen
protection, followed by HMDI (1.147 g, 1.05 equiv., 90 % purity). This solution was stirred
at 65 C for 40 h before removing the DMF. The residue was dissolved in a minimum
amount of DCM, and precipitated out from cold ether three times. The solvent was removed
under vacuum to yield 3.95 g product as a white powder in 98 % yield
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.29–5.24 (m, 6 H, b-H, c-H, d-H), 4.86–4.84 (m, 2

H, a-H), 4.30–4.28 (m, 2 H, f-Ha), 4.10–4.07 (m, 2 H, f-Hb), 3.93–3.85 (m, 4 H, e-H, g-Ha),
3.57–3.41 (m, 12 H, g-Hb, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 2.15, 2.10, 2.05, 1.97 (4 × s, 24 H, 8 ×
CH3), 1.73–0.97 (m, 20 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H)
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.18 (CH3C=O), 169.55 (C=O), 169.22 (C=O),

157.53, 157.36 (C-2, C-12), 97.40 (C-a), 68.76 (C-c), 68.31 (C-e), 67.68 (C-b), 67.56 (Cd), 65.47 (C-g), 61.99 (C-f), 49.93 (C-h), 47.99 (C-1), 46.84, 45.89 (C-3, C-11), 33.02,
32.08, 29.89, 29.56, 29.27, 28.02, 27.93 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10), 20.35
(CH3C=O)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 2925, 1743, 1672, 1628, 1529, 1367, 1215, 1135, 1084, 1040, 977
Synthesis of depro(HMDI-M-D)
171

In a flame-dried flask, poly(HMDI-M-D) (3.60 g) was dissolved in 30 mL anhydrous
methanol, followed by adding catalytic amount of MeONa/MeOH solution. This solution
was stirred at r.t. for 2.5 h with the formation of precipitation. The solvent was poured into
a beaker. MeOH was used to wash the precipitate and combined with the original solvent.
Dowex 50WX8 hydrogen form resin was added into the solvent to adjust pH around 6.0.
After filtration to remove the Dowex 50WX8 resin, the solvent was removed to yield the
product. This product was combined with the precipitate to get 2.40 g product in 97 % yield
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 3.87–3.12 (m, 28 H, a-H, b-H, c-H, d-H, e-H, f-H, g-

H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H), 1.77–0.92 (m, 20 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H);
DEPT–135 (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 99.68 (C-a), 72.69 (C-c), 70.50 (C-e), 69.99 (C-b),
66.53 (C-d), 60.73 (C-f), 46.47 (C-h, C-1)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.62 (C-2, C-12), 99.64 (C-a), 72.70 (C-c), 70.60

(C-e), 70.01 (C-b), 66.53 (C-d), 60.73 (C-f), 47.55 (C-3, C-11), 46.46 (C-h, C-1), 33.21,
32.87, 32.27, 29.90, 29.15, 28.00, 26.69 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3310, 2916, 1620, 1531, 1447, 1404, 1366, 1245, 1135, 1023
Synthesis of sulf(HMDI-M-D)

172

Depro(HMDI-M-D) (1.33 g, 1.0 equiv.) and SO3/pyridine complex (6.89 g, 24.0 equiv.)
was added into a flame-dried flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen for three
times, 20 mL anhydrous pyridine was injected. It was heated at 90 C for 24 h. After the
solvent was removed, saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to 8.0 and
the polymer was isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white powder. Yield
= 2.59 g, 92 %
1

H NMR (D2O, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 5.35 (m, 2 H, c-H), 5.11 (m, 2 H, b-H), 4.89 (m, 2 H,

d-H), 4.66 (m, 4 H, a-H, f-Ha), 4.43–3.50 (m, 18 H, e-H, f-Hb, g-H, h-H, 1-H, 3-H, 11-H),
2.10–1.17 (m, 20 H, 4-H, 5-H, 6-H, 7-H, 8-H, 9-H, 10-H)
13

C NMR (D2O, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 158.75 (C-2, C-12), 97.21 (C-a), 75.30 (C-c), 73.95

(C-e), 71.63 (C-b), 69.71 (C-d), 66.99 (C-g), 66.50 (C-f), 50.88, 48.50,47.21, 46.77, 46.14
(C-1, C-3, C-11, C-h), 33.18, 32.17, 29.13, 28.38 (C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, C-8, C-9, C-10)
FT-IR: (cm-1) 3468, 2923, 1626, 1532, 1221, 1049, 1010
Synthesis of poly(HDI-M-D), depro(HDI-M-D) and sulf(HDI-M-D)
The detailed synthesis procedures, as well as the spectra, can be found from the
Experimental Section of Chapter 2.14b
Synthesis of sulfated glycopolymers from L-D-08 and HMDI with different degree of
173

sulfation
Sulfated glycopolymers from L-D-08 and HMDI with different degrees of sulfation were
synthesized by controlling the equivalents of sulfation reagent. The reaction was performed
in DMF at room temperature for 24 hours. For example: The synthesis of sulf(HMDI-LD)-0.57 was synthesized by mixing depro(HMDI-L-D) (150 mg, 1.0 equiv.) and
SO3/pyridine complex (88 mg, 2.0 equiv. for each lactose) in 6.0 mL anhydrous DMF for
24 hours at room temperature. A saturated NaHCO3 solution was added to adjust the pH to
8.0 and the polymer isolated through dialysis and lyophilization to give a white product.
3.5.3

Contact angle measurements

Contact angles were determined with a Ramé-hart contact angle goniometer (Model 200F1). DCM or methanol solutions of the synthesized polymers were cast onto a polished Si
wafer and dried overnight to produce solvent-cast thin films. Ten microliters of distilled
water was placed onto the polymer surface using a micropipette. Contact angles were
calculated with a tangent method using the software supplied with the goniometer. Each
sample was measured at least three times with different drops of water and the averaged
data are reported. The advancing and receding contact angles were recorded by tilting the
base to 35°.
3.5.4

DSC measurements

A NETZSCH DSC 200 F3 Maia® was utilized to measure the thermal phase transitions of
the deprotected and sulfated polymers by subjecting to two heating and cooling cycles with
a cooling rate of 5 °C/min and a heating rate of 10 °C/min under N2 atmosphere. The
polymers were first cooled to -20 °C and heated to 100 °C. Then, it was cooled back to
25 °C and heated to 200 °C. The second heating/cooling cycle was used to identify the

174

glass transition temperature (Tg), which was taken as the midpoint of the stepwise change
in the heat flow signal.
3.5.5

aPTT assays

Activated partial thromboplastin times (aPTTs) were initiated in mouse platelet poor
plasma (PPP) via use of Sta-PTT reagent on a STA-Hemostasis Analyzer (Diagnostica
Stago). Sulfated polymers were dissolved in HEPES buffered saline (pH 7.3) and spiked
into plasma prior to the initiation of the aPTT as 1/10 volume of the sample. Control
specimens were spiked with HEPES buffered saline only. The final concentrations of the
final sulfated polymers are as indicated in the text. Maximal observation time for the aPTT
was 300 seconds.
3.5.6

PT assays

Thromboplastin (Biopool) was reconstituted with 5 mL of water and warmed alongside
wild-type mouse plasma which contained the polymer under study (prepared as for the
aPTT assay) to 37 °C. The thromboplastin and plasma were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and
agitated manually until a clot was observed to form. Each plasma was assayed in duplicate
with a maximal observation time of 60 seconds.
3.5.7

TT assays

A solution of 20 units/mL of bovine thrombin (Enzyme Research Laboratories) and 400
mM CaCl2 in HEPES buffered saline was prepared and kept on ice until use. Separately,
wild-type mouse plasma containing the polymer under study (prepared as for the aPTT
assay) was warmed to 37 °C. The thrombin solution and wild-type mouse plasma were then
mixed in a 1:10 ratio and agitated manually until a clot was observed to form with a
maximal assay time of 60 seconds.

175

3.6 References
1.

Williams, D. F., The Williams dictionary of biomaterials. Liverpool University

Press: 1999.
2.

(a) Kajiyama, T.; Takahara, A., Surface properties and platelet reactivity of

segmented poly(etherurethanes) and poly(etherurethaneureas). J. Biomater. Appl. 1991, 6
(1), 42-71; (b) Lamba, N. M. K.; Woodhouse, K. A.; Cooper, S. L., Polyurethanes in
biomedical applications. CRC press: 1997; (c) Vermette, P.; Griesser, H. J.; Laroche, G.;
Guidoin, R., Biomedical applications of polyurethanes. Landes Bioscience Georgetown,
TX: 2001.
3.

(a) Pitt, W. G.; Park, K.; Cooper, S. L., Sequential protein adsorption and thrombus

deposition on polymeric biomaterials. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 1986, 111 (2), 343-362; (b)
Guiseppi-Elie, A.; Dong, C.; Dinu, C. Z., Crosslink density of a biomimetic poly(HEMA)based hydrogel influences growth and proliferation of attachment dependent RMS 13 cells.
J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (37), 19529-19539; (c) Kotanen, C. N.; Wilson, A. N.; Dong, C.;
Dinu, C.-Z.; Justin, G. A.; Guiseppi-Elie, A., The effect of the physicochemical properties
of bioactive electroconductive hydrogels on the growth and proliferation of attachment
dependent cells. Biomaterials 2013, 34 (27), 6318-6327.
4.

Yeganeh, H.; Orang, F.; Solouk, A.; Rafienia, M., Synthesis, characterization and

preliminary investigation of blood compatibility of novel epoxy-modified polyurethane
networks. J. Bioact. Compat. Polym. 2008, 23 (3), 276-300.
5.

(a) Hong, Y.; Ye, S.-H.; Pelinescu, A. L.; Wagner, W. R., Synthesis, Characterization,

and Paclitaxel Release from a Biodegradable, Elastomeric, Poly(ester urethane)urea
Bearing Phosphorylcholine Groups for Reduced Thrombogenicity. Biomacromolecules

176

2012, 13 (11), 3686-3694; (b) Cao, J.; Chen, N.; Chen, Y.; Luo, X., Synthesis of a Novel
Biodegradable Polyurethane with Phosphatidylcholines. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2010, 11 (4),
1870-1877; (c) Fang, J.; Ye, S.-H.; Shankarraman, V.; Huang, Y.; Mo, X.; Wagner, W. R.,
Biodegradable poly(ester urethane)urea elastomers with variable amino content for
subsequent functionalization with phosphorylcholine. Acta Biomater. 2014, 10 (11), 46394649.
6.

Cao, J.; Yang, M.; Lu, A.; Zhai, S.; Chen, Y.; Luo, X., Polyurethanes containing

zwitterionic sulfobetaines and their molecular chain rearrangement in water. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res., Part A 2013, 101A (3), 909-918.
7.

(a) Chan-Chan, L. H.; Tkaczyk, C.; Vargas-Coronado, R. F.; Cervantes-Uc, J. M.;

Tabrizian, M.; Cauich-Rodriguez, J. V., Characterization and biocompatibility studies of
new degradable poly(urea)urethanes prepared with arginine, glycine or aspartic acid as
chain extenders. J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med. 2013, 24 (7), 1733-1744; (b) Guelcher, S. A.;
Srinivasan, A.; Dumas, J. E.; Didier, J. E.; McBride, S.; Hollinger, J. O., Synthesis,
mechanical properties, biocompatibility, and biodegradation of polyurethane networks
from lysine polyisocyanates. Biomaterials 2008, 29 (12), 1762-1775.
8.

(a) Xu, Y.; Wu, X.; Xie, X.; Zhong, Y.; Guidoin, R.; Zhang, Z.; Fu, Q., Synthesis of

polycarbonate urethanes with functional poly(ethylene glycol) side chains intended for
bioconjugates. Polymer 2013, 54 (20), 5363-5373; (b) Oprea, S., Dependence of fungal
biodegradation of PEG/castor oil-based polyurethane elastomers on the hard-segment
structure. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2010, 95 (12), 2396-2404; (c) Zhou, X.; Zhang, T.; Guo,
D.; Gu, N., A facile preparation of poly(ethylene oxide)-modified medical polyurethane to
improve hemocompatibility. Colloids Surf., A 2014, 441 (0), 34-42; (d) Archambault, J. G.;

177

Brash, J. L., Protein repellent polyurethane-urea surfaces by chemical grafting of hydroxylterminated poly(ethylene oxide): effects of protein size and charge. Colloids Surf., B 2004,
33 (2), 111-120.
9.

Xu, F.; Flanagan, C. E.; Ruiz, A.; Crone, W. C.; Masters, K. S.,

Polyurethane/Dermatan Sulfate Copolymers as Hemocompatible, Non-Biofouling
Materials. Macromol. Biosci. 2011, 11 (2), 257-266.
10.

Heuck, C. C.; Schiele, U.; Horn, D.; Fronda, D.; Ritz, E., The Role of Surface-

Charge on the Accelerating Action of Heparin on the Antithrombin Iii Inhibited Activity of
Alpha-Thrombin. J. Biol. Chem. 1985, 260 (8), 4598-4603.
11.

Lever, R.; Mulloy, B.; Page, C. P., Heparin - A Century of Progress. Springer Berlin

Heidelberg: 2012; p 457.
12.

Liu, H.; Zhang, Z.; Linhardt, R. J., Lessons learned from the contamination of

heparin. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2009, 26 (3), 313-321.
13.

(a) Guan, R.; Sun, X.-L.; Hou, S.; Wu, P.; Chaikof, E. L., A Glycopolymer

Chaperone for Fibroblast Growth Factor-2. Bioconjugate Chem. 2004, 15 (1), 145-151; (b)
Freeman, I.; Kedem, A.; Cohen, S., The effect of sulfation of alginate hydrogels on the
specific binding and controlled release of heparin-binding proteins. Biomaterials 2008, 29
(22), 3260-3268; (c) Nguyen, T. H.; Kim, S.-H.; Decker, C. G.; Wong, D. Y.; Loo, J. A.;
Maynard, H. D., A heparin-mimicking polymer conjugate stabilizes basic fibroblast growth
factor. Nat. Chem. 2013, 5 (3), 221-227; (d) Kolodziej, C. M.; Kim, S. H.; Broyer, R. M.;
Saxer, S. S.; Decker, C. G.; Maynard, H. D., Combination of Integrin-Binding Peptide and
Growth Factor Promotes Cell Adhesion on Electron-Beam-Fabricated Patterns. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 (1), 247-255; (e) Christman, K. L.; Vazquez-Dorbatt, V.; Schopf, E.;

178

Kolodziej, C. M.; Li, R. C.; Broyer, R. M.; Chen, Y.; Maynard, H. D., Nanoscale Growth
Factor Patterns by Immobilization on a Heparin-Mimicking Polymer. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2008, 130 (49), 16585-16591; (f) Nguyen, T. H.; Paluck, S. J.; McGahran, A. J.; Maynard,
H.

D.,

Poly(vinyl

sulfonate)

Facilitates

bFGF-Induced

Cell

Proliferation.

Biomacromolecules 2015, 16 (9), 2684-2692; (g) Sangaj, N.; Kyriakakis, P.; Yang, D.;
Chang, C. W.; Arya, G.; Varghese, S., Heparin Mimicking Polymer Promotes Myogenic
Differentiation of Muscle Progenitor Cells. Biomacromolecules 2010, 11 (12), 3294-3300;
(h) Mammadov, R.; Mammadov, B.; Guler, M. O.; Tekinay, A. B., Growth Factor Binding
on Heparin Mimetic Peptide Nanofibers. Biomacromolecules 2012, 13 (10), 3311-3319; (i)
Mammadov, R.; Mammadov, B.; Toksoz, S.; Aydin, B.; Yagci, R.; Tekinay, A. B.; Guler,
M. O., Heparin Mimetic Peptide Nanofibers Promote Angiogenesis. Biomacromolecules
2011, 12 (10), 3508-3519; (j) Lake, A. C.; Vassy, R.; Di Benedetto, M.; Lavigne, D.; Le
Visage, C.; Perret, G. Y.; Letourneur, D., Low Molecular Weight Fucoidan Increases
VEGF165-induced Endothelial Cell Migration by Enhancing VEGF165 Binding to
VEGFR-2 and NRP1. J. Biol. Chem. 2006, 281 (49), 37844-37852; (k) LogeartAvramoglou, D.; Jozefonvicz, J., Carboxymethyl benzylamide sulfonate dextrans
(CMDBS), a family of biospecific polymers endowed with numerous biological properties:
A review. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1999, 48 (4), 578-590; (l) Silver, J. H.; Hart, A. P.;
Williams, E. C.; Cooper, S. L.; Charef, S.; Labarre, D.; Jozefowicz, M., Anticoagulant
effects of sulphonated polyurethanes. Biomaterials 1992, 13 (6), 339-344; (m) Stanislawski,
L.; Serne, H.; Stanislawski, M.; Jozefowicz, M., Conformational changes of fibronectin
induced by polystyrene derivatives with a heparin-like function. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
1993, 27 (5), 619-626; (n) Tardieu, M.; Gamby, C.; Avramoglou, T.; Jozefonvicz, J.;

179

Barritault, D., Derivatized dextrans mimic heparin as stabilizers, potentiators, and
protectors of acidic or basic FGF. J. Cell. Physiol. 1992, 150 (1), 194-203; (o) Kanmangne,
F. M.; Serne, H.; Labarre, D.; Jozefowicz, M., Heparin-like activity of insoluble sulfonated
polystyrene resins. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 1986, 110 (1), 21-31.
14.

(a) Huang, Y.; Taylor, L.; Chen, X.; Ayres, N., Synthesis of a polyurea from a

glucose- or mannose-containing N-alkyl urea peptoid oligomer. J. Polym. Sci., Part A:
Polym. Chem. 2013, 51 (24), 5230-5238; (b) Huang, Y.; Shaw, M. A.; Mullins, E. S.; Kirley,
T. L.; Ayres, N., Synthesis and Anticoagulant Activity of Polyureas Containing Sulfated
Carbohydrates. Biomacromolecules 2014, 15 (12), 4455-4466; (c) Taylor, L.; Chen, X.;
Ayres, N., Synthesis of a glycosaminoglycan polymer mimetic using an N-alkyl-N,N-linked
urea oligomer containing glucose pendant groups. Polym. Int. 2014, 63 (1), 127-135.
15.

Zincke, T.; Rollhäuser, H., Über 4.2-Amino-tolylmercaptan. Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges.

1912, 45 (2), 1495-1511.
16.

Michiardi, A.; Aparicio, C.; Ratner, B. D.; Planell, J. A.; Gil, J., The influence of

surface energy on competitive protein adsorption on oxidized NiTi surfaces. Biomaterials
2007, 28 (4), 586-594.
17.

Johnson, J. C.; Wanasekara, N. D.; Korley, L. T. J., Utilizing Peptidic Ordering in

the Design of Hierarchical Polyurethane/Ureas. Biomacromolecules 2012, 13 (5), 12791286.
18.

(a) Javni, I.; Zhang, W.; Petrović, Z. S., Effect of different isocyanates on the

properties of soy-based polyurethanes. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2003, 88 (13), 2912-2916; (b)
Hiltunen, K.; Seppälä, J. V.; Härkönen, M., Lactic acid based poly(ester-urethane)s: The
effects of different polymerization conditions on the polymer structure and properties. J.

180

Appl. Polym. Sci. 1997, 64 (5), 865-873.
19.

Leung, L. L., Perioperative evaluation of bleeding diathesis. ASH Education

Program Book 2006, 2006 (1), 457-461.
20.

(a) Oh, Y. I.; Sheng, G. J.; Chang, S.-K.; Hsieh-Wilson, L. C., Tailored

Glycopolymers as Anticoagulant Heparin Mimetics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52 (45),
11796-11799; (b) Sun, X.-L.; Grande, D.; Baskaran, S.; Hanson, S. R.; Chaikof, E. L.,
Glycosaminoglycan Mimetic Biomaterials. 4. Synthesis of Sulfated Lactose-Based
Glycopolymers That Exhibit Anticoagulant Activity. Biomacromolecules 2002, 3 (5),
1065-1070.
21.

(a) LaDuca, F. M.; Zucker, M. L.; Walker, C. E., Assessing heparin neutralization

following cardiac surgery: Sensitivity of thrombin time-based assays versus protamine
titration methods. Perfusion 1999, 14 (3), 181-187; (b) Flanders, M. M.; Crist, R.; Rodgers,
G. M., Comparison of five thrombin time reagents. Clin. Chem. 2003, 49 (1), 169-172; (c)
Denson, K. W. E., The sensitivity of human and bovine thrombin to heparin in plasma.
Thromb. Res. 1981, 23 (3), 207-213.
22.

(a) Kinoshita, M.; Kakoi, N.; Matsuno, Y.-k.; Hayakawa, T.; Kakehi, K.,

Determination of sulfate ester content in sulfated oligo- and poly-saccharides by capillary
electrophoresis with indirect UV detection. Biomed. Chromatogr. 2011, 25 (5), 588-593;
(b) Sommers, C. D.; Keire, D. A., Detection of Possible Economically Motivated
Adulterants in Heparin Sodium and Low Molecular Weight Heparins with a Colorimetric
Microplate Based Assay. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83 (18), 7102-7108; (c) Crowther, M. A.; Berry,
L. R.; Monagle, P. T.; Chan, A. K. C., Mechanisms responsible for the failure of protamine
to inactivate low-molecular-weight heparin. Br. J. Haematol. 2002, 116 (1), 178-186.

181

23.

(a) Hikino, M.; Mikami, T.; Faissner, A.; Vilela-Silva, A.-C. E.; Pavão, M. S.;

Sugahara, K., Oversulfated Dermatan Sulfate Exhibits Neurite Outgrowth-promoting
Activity toward Embryonic Mouse Hippocampal Neurons IMPLICATIONS OF
DERMATAN SULFATE IN NEURITOGENESIS IN THE BRAIN. J. Biol. Chem. 2003,
278 (44), 43744-43754; (b) Guerrini, M.; Beccati, D.; Shriver, Z.; Naggi, A.; Viswanathan,
K.; Bisio, A.; Capila, I.; Lansing, J. C.; Guglieri, S.; Fraser, B.; Al-Hakim, A.; Gunay, N.
S.; Zhang, Z.; Robinson, L.; Buhse, L.; Nasr, M.; Woodcock, J.; Langer, R.; Venkataraman,
G.; Linhardt, R. J.; Casu, B.; Torri, G.; Sasisekharan, R., Oversulfated chondroitin sulfate
is a contaminant in heparin associated with adverse clinical events. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008,
26 (6), 669-675.
24.

Akashi, M.; Sakamoto, N.; Suzuki, K.; Kishida, A., Synthesis and anticoagulant

activity of sulfated glucoside-bearing polymer. Bioconjugate Chem. 1996, 7 (4), 393-395.
25.

(a) Fan, L.; Zhou, X.; Wu, P.; Xie, W.; Zheng, H.; Tan, W.; Liu, S.; Li, Q.,

Preparation of carboxymethyl cellulose sulfates and its application as anticoagulant and
wound dressing. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2014, 66 (0), 245-253; (b) Liu, T.; Scallan, C. D.;
Broze, G. J.; Patarroyo-White, S.; Pierce, G. F.; Johnson, K. W., Improved coagulation in
bleeding disorders by Non-Anticoagulant Sulfated Polysaccharides (NASP). Thromb.
Haemostasis 2006, 95 (1), 68; (c) Zhang, Z.; Till, S.; Jiang, C.; Knappe, S.; Reutterer, S.;
Scheiflinger, F.; Szabo, C. M.; Dockal, M., Structure-activity relationship of the pro- and
anticoagulant effects of Fucus vesiculosus fucoidan. Thromb. Haemostasis 2014, 111 (3),
429-437; (d) Fan, L.; Gao, S.; Wang, L.; Wu, P.; Cao, M.; Zheng, H.; Xie, W.; Zhou, J.,
Synthesis and anticoagulant activity of pectin sulfates. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2012, 124 (3),
2171-2178.

182

183

Chapter 4. Synthesis of Lactose-Containing Hydrogels for Enzyme Stabilization

4.1 Abstract
Lactose-containing monomers, sulfated and nonsulfated N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamides,
were synthesized and polymerized with N-hydroxyethyl acrylamide (HEAA) and 1 wt%
of N,N'-methylenebis(acrylamide) (MBAA) and potassium persulfate (KPS) as the initiator
to produce hydrogels. The weight percent of sulfated and nonsulfated N-(2lactosylethyl)acrylamides were increased from 0 to 100 % in increments of 10 %.
Hydrogels were successfully produced with up to 90 wt% of N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamide
and 70 wt% of sulfated N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamide. Gelation was confirmed by inverted
vial tests and rheology measurements. The nonsulfated hydrogels were used for papain
stabilization against heat burden and papain that was loaded into hydrogels showed 45%
more activity after heating as compared to papain that was heated without hydrogel
stabilization. This hydrogel stabilization technique has potential applications in preserving
enzyme activity.

4.2 Introduction
Enzymes are biological macromolecular catalysts that can accelerate chemical reactions
with high specificity and efficiency. Enzymes are broadly applied in industry, for example
lactase removing lactose from milk in the food industry, protease removing protein stains
in detergents, lipase resolution of chiral alcohols and amides in organic synthesis, and
phosphorus release by phytase digestion in animal feed.1 The catalytic activities of
enzymes are imparted from their three-dimensional structures. These three-dimensional

184

structures are maintained through noncovalent interactions, including hydrogen bonding,
π-π interactions, ionic bonds, and salt bridges, and can be influenced by changes in the
external environment, such as solvent, pressure, pH, and temperature.2 The structural
stability of enzymes with changing temperature is particularly important, as in many
applications enzymes are exposed to elevated temperatures to increase their solubility,
catalytic activity, and efficiency. However, elevated temperatures may induce unfolding,
or denaturation, resulting in the enzyme exposing hydrophobic residues and forming
insoluble aggregates.3 While there is no general solution to enzyme denaturation the basic
requirements are well-studied,4 and strategies enhancing intrachain interactions will
stabilize an enzyme’s native structure and protect against denaturation. Examples of such
strategies include addition of co-solutes,5 chemical modification,6 immobilization in solids
or gel-like matrices,7 and protein engineering.8
Papain is a cysteine protease extracted from the papaya tree, and has broad industrial
applications due to its strong proteolytic activity against a range of natural and synthetic
substrates. Papain is used in meat tenderizers,9 to cleave IgG molecules,10 detergents,11 in
leather processing, and in beverage production.12 The maximal activity of papain was
reported by several independent groups to be at around 55 C13 while papain denatures at
83-84 C.13f, 14 The Polović group extensively studied the thermal stability of papain at high
temperatures and during freezing.13f Increasing the temperature from 60 C to 95 C
dramatically dropped the enzyme’s activity from 99.5 % to only 0.5 %. Papain slowly
denatured from its native secondary structure to intermolecular β-sheets at low
temperatures, and around 75% activity was lost after six freeze-thaw cycles.

185

Various methods have been reported to increase papain stability at higher temperatures,
including solvent stabilization, immobilization onto supports and protein engineering. For
example, the Lozano group15 used ethylene glycol, glycerol, erythritol, xylitol and sorbitol
cosolvents to improve the thermal stability of papain. The Prakash group14 also reported
an increased thermal denaturation temperature from 83 ±1 C to > 90 ±1 C in the presence
of 40% sorbitol. This stabilization force was attributed to the free energy required to form
a cavity in the solvent need for accommodating the enzyme molecule, the stabilization
being conferred on the enzyme by the increase in the solvent cohesive force when sugar is
added to water in the solvent system.16 Weetall et al.17 reported retention of enzymatic
activity in papain covalently immobilized on porous silica glasses17a and ZrO2 coated
glasses.17b The Xu group18 also reported thermal activation of immobilized papain at
temperatures ranging from 50 to 90 C. Organic carriers, such as cellulose,17a
polyethylene,19 sepharose,20 cotton fabric,21 and chitosan22 have also been used to stabilize
papain. Recently, protein engineering emerged as a new strategy to stabilize papain by
structural mutation. Three mutations in the papain interdomain regions were introduced in
order to improve papain’s thermostability without perturbing its enzymatic activity.23
Furthermore, umpolung modifications have been performed on lysine residues in papain
to change the net charge from positive to negative, resulting in higher thermostabilities.24
However, constraints with these various approaches remain, for example, the solvents that
can stabilize papain may limit papain’s applications, covalent immobilization of papain
renders it difficult to be released in physiological conditions, and protein engineering is
time-consuming and expensive.

186

In this chapter, we stabilized papain using lactose-containing hydrogels. Lactose is a
disaccharide comprised of a galactose and a glucose unit. This strategy is based on
literature showing lactose solutions stabilizing proteins such as ribonuclease A,
chymotrypsinogen A, bovine serum albumin, and ovalbumin.25 Lactose-containing
polymers/hydrogels are potentially biocompatible, biodegradable, and biorenewable
materials, with applications including as anticoagulants,26 water adsorbents,27 sensors.28
We synthesized lactose-containing monomers, sulfated and nonsulfated N-(2lactosylethyl)acrylamide, and copolymerized it with HEAA to produce a set of hydrogels
with different monomer ratios. The merits of this strategy include the easy synthesis of the
hydrogels with tunable mechanical properties, quick release of papain from the hydrogels,
and the easy purification of the released papain from hydrogels by simple filtration.

4.3 Results and discussion
4.3.1

Synthesis of lactose containing monomers

The synthetic route to lactose-containing monomers, sulfated and nonsulfated N-(2lactosylethyl)acrylamides, is shown in Figure 4.1.26b Lactose was acetylated to protect the
hydroxyl groups and the anomeric acetate group selectively deprotected by benzyl amine
(L03). After activating the anomeric hydroxyl group with trichloroacetonitrile, a
glycosylation reaction was performed by adding N-hydroxyethyl acrylamide with boron
trifluoride diethyl etherate to generate the acetyl-protected lactose-acrylamide (L05). The
desired monomer, N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamide (L06), was obtained by deprotection with
a catalytic amount of NaOMe/MeOH solution.26a, 29 Sulfation of L06 with a SO3/NMe3
complex generated the sulfated N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamide (L07).26a, 29

187

Figure 4.1. Synthetic route for lactose containing monomers, sulfated and nonsulfated N(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamides.

4.3.2

Hydrogel synthesis from nonsulfated N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamides

Nonsulfated hydrogels were prepared by dissolving L06, HEAA, MBAA (1.0 wt%) and
KPS (1.0 wt%) in deionized water in a glass vial at an overall concentration of 100 mg/mL.
The reaction mixture was heated at 70 C for 1.0 h. MBAA and KPS were used as a
crosslinker and an initiator, respectively. The weight percent of L06 was varied from 0%
to 100% by increments of 10% in order to examine the effect of different amounts of L06
on gel properties. The obtained results are summarized in Table 4.1 and an image of the
inverted vials is presented in Figure 4.2.

Table 4.1. Hydrogel synthesis with different weight percent of L06 and HEAA.
Hydrogel

L06 (g) HEAA (g) Gel (Yes/No)a Gel Fraction (%) Swelling Ratio

HO-0-10

0.00

0.50

Yes

99

22

HO-1-9

0.05

0.45

Yes

98

23

188

a

HO-2-8

0.10

0.40

Yes

98

24

HO-3-7

0.15

0.35

Yes

97

24

HO-4-6

0.20

0.30

Yes

96

24

HO-5-5

0.25

0.25

Yes

96

24

HO-6-4

0.30

0.20

Yes

94

25

HO-7-3

0.35

0.15

Yes

87

27

HO-8-2

0.40

0.10

Yes

84

31

HO-9-1

0.45

0.05

Yes

76

34

HO-10-0

0.50

0.00

No

N.A.

N.A.

A hydrogel was determined to be obtained if stable in the inverted vial test (Figure 4.2).

Figure 4.2. Inverted vials showing the hydrogel formation with different weight percent of
L06 and HEAA in deionized water.

Hydrogels with compositions from HO-0-10 to HO-9-1 were successfully obtained, but
when a polymerization with no HEAA was attempted (HO-10-0), no hydrogel was
observed to form. As seen from Table 4.1, the gel fractions decreased from 99 to 76 % with
increasing weight percent of L06 from 0 to 90 %. Therefore, less monomer (both HEAA
189

and L06) was incorporated into the crosslinked network as the amount of L06 increased.
The swelling ratios are also collected in Table 4.1. Increasing amount of L06 resulted in
increased swelling ratios. Larger swelling ratios can indicate weaker gels, and this result
was further confirmed by rheology measurements.

4.3.3

Hydrogel synthesis from sulfated N-(2-lactosylethyl)acrylamides

Similar synthetic strategies were applied to synthesize sulfated hydrogels by dissolving
L07, HEAA, MBAA, and KPS in deionized water at an overall concentration of 100
mg/mL. The weight percent of L07 was also varied from 0% to 100% by increments of
10%, as collected in Table 4.2 and Figure 4.3.

Table 4.2. Hydrogel synthesis with different weight percentages of L07 and HEAA.
Hydrogel

L07 (g)

HEAA (g)

Gel (Yes/No)a

Gel fraction

Swelling ratio

S-0-10

0.00

0.50

Yes

99

22

S-1-9

0.05

0.45

Yes

96

71

S-2-8

0.10

0.40

Yes

93

73

S-3-7

0.15

0.35

Yes

91

149

S-4-6

0.20

0.30

Yes

91

163

S-5-5

0.25

0.25

Yes

89

226

S-6-4

0.30

0.20

Yes

80

164

S-7-3

0.35

0.15

Yes (weak)

60

102

S-8-2

0.40

0.10

No

N.A.

N.A.

S-9-1

0.45

0.05

No

N.A.

N.A.

190

S-10-0
a

0.50

0.00

No

N.A.

N.A.

A hydrogel was determined to be obtained if stable in the inverted vial test (Figure 4.3).

Figure 4.3. Inverted vials showing the hydrogel formation with different weight percent of
L07 and HEAA in deionized water.

Figure 4.3 clearly indicated the successful hydrogel synthesis from S-0-10 to S-7-3,
although hydrogel S-7-3 is very weak. Higher weight percent of L07 failed to form
hydrogels. This result can be explained by a synergistic effect of ionic effects and the high
water solubility of L07. Negatively charged L07 had strong electrostatic repulsion forces
among the sulfate functional groups, which would make it hard to form a crosslinked
network. This hypothesis was supported by the measured gel fraction values (Table 4.2),
which decreased with increasing amount of L07.
The swelling ratio of the synthesized hydrogels was measured by immersing the dry
hydrogels in deionized water for 48 h at room temperature (Table 4.2).30 While pure HEAA
hydrogel (S-0-10) has a low swelling ratio of 22, it dramatically increased to 71 for S-1-9
with only 10 wt% of L07. Increasing the amount of L07 resulted in higher swelling ratios

191

and the maximum value was obtained for hydrogel S-5-5 with a value of 226 within 48 h.
This can be explained by the strong electrostatic repulsion forces from the negatively
charged sulfate functional groups. Upon contact with deionized water, the hydrogel
network expands in order to reduce the electrostatic repulsive forces by releasing countercations and absorbing large amounts of deionized water into the hydrogel network. The
swelling ratio decreased to 162 and 102 for hydrogels S-6-4 and S-7-3 respectively, which
was probably due to the increased water solubility of these two hydrogels.

4.3.4

Rheological measurement of the nonsulfated hydrogels

Rheology is the study of the deformation and flow of a matter under the effect of an applied
force. It is generally applied to measure the behavior of non-Newtonian fluids. By applying
a shear stress to a matter, the deformation of the matter will be measured. While a flow
matter cannot revert to its original state when the force is removed, an elastic matter has
reversible deformational property. In this chapter, rheology can provide the viscoelastic
behavior of a matter, giving concrete evidence for the formation of a hydrogel and the
strength of the hydrogel. Storage modulus (G’) comes from the angle change of chemical
bonds, and focused on the elastic character (solid) of a matter. Loss modulus (G”) measures
the interchain frictions of a matter, focusing on the viscosity character (liquid) of a matter.
A higher value of storage modulus over the loss modulus indicates the formation a hydrogel.
By plotting the storage modulus versus the loss modulus from rheology, it can provide
evidence for the formation of a hydrogel beyond an inverted vial test. The time sweep
storage and loss moduli of the synthesized hydrogels are shown in Figures 4.4 and 4.5,
respectively, which were observed at equilibrium during the measurement time. With

192

increasing weight percentages of L06, the average storage moduli decreased from 7112 to
1.45 Pa for hydrogels HO-0-10 to HO-10-0 in a hierarchical order, while slight changes
were observed in the average loss moduli with no obvious hierarchical order. Successful
gelation of all compositions except HO-10-0 is shown by storage moduli values of at least
one order of magnitude higher than the corresponding loss moduli, confirming the
dominant elastic characters. As for HO-10-0, very low values of storage and loss moduli
were obtained with a slightly higher storage modulus (1.45 Pa) than the loss modulus (0.45
Pa), indicating the failure to form a hydrogel, which is consistent with the inversion test
shown in Figure 4.2.

HO-10-0
HO-9-1
HO-8-2
HO-7-3
HO-6-4
HO-5-5
HO-4-6
HO-3-7
HO-2-8
HO-1-9
HO-0-10

Storage modulus, G' (Pa)

1000

100

10

1

0.1

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Time (s)

Figure 4.4. Time sweep storage moduli, G’, for the nonsulfated hydrogels at 37 C with a
frequency of 1.0 Hz and a strain of 1.0 %.

193

HO-10-0
HO-9-1
HO-8-2
HO-7-3
HO-6-4
HO-5-5
HO-4-6
HO-3-7
HO-2-8
HO-1-9
HO-0-10

Loss modulus, G'' (Pa)

1000

100

10

1

0.1

0

50

100

200

150

250

300

350

Time (s)

Figure 4.5. Time sweep loss moduli, G”, for the nonsulfated hydrogels at 37 C with a
frequency of 1.0 Hz and a strain of 1.0 %.

The frequency sweep storage and loss moduli of the synthesized hydrogels are shown in
Figures 4.6 and 4.7, respectively. The storage moduli were observed as plateaus during the
measurements of the hydrogels, except with samples HO-9-1 and HO-10-0. At high
frequencies, the storage modulus of HO-9-1 decreased slightly, while the storage modulus
of HO-10-0 increased. Interestingly, the tan δ value (i.e., G”/G’) for HO-9-1 increased from
0.059 to 1.50, indicating the decreasing elastic character (i.e. more solution-like character)
of HO-9-1 at high frequencies. On the other hand, the tan δ value of HO-10-0 decreased
from 1.93 to 0.077, indicating increased elastic character at high frequencies. This
observation means that HO-9-1 acts as a solution at higher frequencies, whereas HO-10-0
becomes gel-like at higher frequencies.
194

HO-10-0
HO-9-1
HO-8-2
HO-7-3
HO-6-4
HO-5-5
HO-4-6
HO-3-7
HO-2-8
HO-1-9
HO-0-10

Storage modulus, G' (Pa)

1000

100

10

1

0.1

0

10

20

40

30

50

60

70

Frequency (rad/s)

Figure 4.6. Frequency sweep storage moduli, G’, for the nonsulfated hydrogels at 37 C
with a strain of 1.0 %.

HO-10-0
HO-9-1
HO-8-2
HO-7-3
HO-6-4
HO-5-5
HO-4-6
HO-3-7
HO-2-8
HO-1-9
HO-0-10

Loss modulus, G" (Pa)

1000

100

10

1

0.1

0

10

20

30

40

Frequency (rad/s)

195

50

60

70

Figure 4.7. Frequency sweep loss moduli, G’’, for the nonsulfated hydrogels at 37 C with
a strain of 1.0 %.

4.3.5

Rheological measurement of the sulfated hydrogels

Similar rheological measurements were also applied to the sulfated hydrogels, as illustrated

Storage modulus, G' (Pa)

in Figure 4.8 and 4.9 for the time sweep storage and loss moduli, respectively.

S-8-2
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

1000

100

10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Time (s)

Figure 4.8. Time sweep storage moduli, G’, for the sulfated hydrogels at 37 C with a
frequency of 1.0 Hz and a strain of 1.0 %.

196

S-8-2
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

Loss modulus, G'' (Pa)

1000

100

10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Time (s)

Figure 4.9. Time sweep loss moduli, G”, for the sulfated hydrogels at 37 C with a
frequency of 1.0 Hz and a strain of 1.0 %.

With increasing L07 percent, the storage moduli decreased from 5320 to 18 Pa for
hydrogels S-0-10 to S-8-2, while the loss moduli changed slightly with no obvious
hierarchical order. A comparison between G’ and G” showed that the storage modulus
values were at least one order of magnitude higher than the corresponding loss modulus,
except for S-7-3 and S-8-2, which confirmed the dominant elastic characters, i.e. the
successful synthesis of hydrogels. As for S-7-3 and S-8-2, the rheology data indicated a
weak hydrogel of S-7-3, and a failure to form a gel for S-8-2. These results agreed with the
inverted vial image shown in Figure 4.3.

197

The frequency sweep measurements were also performed over a range of 0.1-100 Hz, as
depicted in Figure 4.10 and 4.11, for the storage and loss moduli, respectively. Except S8-2, all storage moduli maintained equilibrium during the measurement. It should be noted
that as the frequency increased, the tanδ values (i.e., G”/G’) of S-7-3 increased from 0.04
to 0.80, indicating a losing elastic character of S-7-3 at high frequencies, which

Storage modulus, G' (Pa)

corroborated the weak elastic property of hydrogel S-7-3.

S-8-2
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

1000

100

10

0

20

40

60

Frequency (rad/s)

80

Figure 4.10. Frequency sweep storage moduli, G’, for the sulfated hydrogels at 37 C with
a strain of 1.0 %.

198

S-8-2
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

Loss modulus, G" (Pa)

1000

100

10

0

20

40

60

80

Frequency (rad/s)

Figure 4.11. Frequency sweep loss moduli, G”, for the sulfated hydrogels at 37 C with a
strain of 1.0 %.

4.3.6

Stimuli responses of sulfated hydrogels

“Smart” hydrogels are hydrogels that can respond to an external stimulus by undergoing
large structural changes, such as the changes in pH values, temperature, ionic strengths,
electric/magnetic files or a specific analyte, etc.31 “Smart” hydrogels have been applied in
diverse fields, including biosensors,32 drug delivery,33 biomedical applications,34 tissue
engineering,35 and bioseparations.36 Polyelectrolytes are known to be sensitive to the pH
values and ionic strengths. In this chapter, both stimuli, pH value and ionic strength, were
examined on the rheology of the sulfated hydrogels, and hydrogel S-4-6 was selected as a
proof-of-principle for the influence of pH values.

199

Hydrogel S-4-6 was prepared at three different pH values: pH 3.0, 7.0, and 10.0. The
rheology was measured and shown in Figure 4.12 and 4.13 for the time sweep and
frequency sweep storage and loss moduli, respectively. As seen from Figure 4.12, a slight
storage modulus change (within 3%) was observed at different pH values. This minor
change can be considered as the case-by-case variations due to the sensitivity of the
instrument. Compared with differences between the storage moduli, even smaller changes
were observed for the loss moduli, ranging from 22.0 Pa to 3.3 Pa at three different pH
values. Similar data were obtained from the frequency sweep measurements for the storage
and loss moduli differences. These observations clearly indicated the independence of S4-6 towards pH values.

1000

G', G" (Pa)

For S-4-6:
pH = 3.0
pH = 7.0
pH = 10.0

100

10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Time (s)

Figure 4.12. Time sweep storage and loss moduli for hydrogel S-4-6 at different pH values
at 37 C with a frequency of 1.0 Hz and a strain of 1.0 %.

200

G', G" (Pa)

1000

For S-4-6:
pH = 3.0
pH = 7.0
pH = 10.0
100

10

0

20

40

60

80

Frequency (rad/s)

Figure 4.13. Frequency sweep storage and loss moduli for hydrogel S-4-6 at different pH
values at 37 C with a strain of 1.0 %.

After examining the pH influence on the hydrogel’s rheology, we turned our attention to
ionic strength effects because polyelectrolytic hydrogels are subjected to be affected by the
ionic strengths. In this case, we prepared our hydrogels in 1.0 M NaCl solutions to
investigate the rheological changes. The time sweep storage and loss moduli were depicted
in Figure 4.14 and 4.15, respectively. The same hierarchical order of the storage moduli
was also observed for the hydrogels synthesized in 1.0 M NaCl, i.e., the storage moduli
decreased with increasing weight percentages of L07. However, compared with the
hydrogels produced in deionized water, the corresponding storage moduli decreased from
10 to 53 % with increasing weight percentage of L07, except for hydrogel S-0-10, which
increased 9.8 %. This observation can be explained by the competition effect of substance
201

effect and the ionic strength effect. While the addition of NaCl in the hydrogel preparation
solution would increase the total amount of starting substance, leading to a positive effect
by increasing the storage modulus, the introduced ions (Na+ and Cl-) can also help to reduce
the electrostatic repulsion forces among anionic sulfate functional groups by lowering the
storage modulus. For hydrogel S-0-10, no repulsion forces existed due to the lack of
anionic L07, resulting in an increased storage modulus. For the other hydrogels, the ionic
strength effect overrode the substance effect. The higher weight percentage of L07, the
more obvious ionic strength effect can be observed, leading to an increased decrement
percent. On the other hand, minor changes were observed for the loss moduli as compared

Storage modulus, G' (Pa)

with those in deionized water.

In 1.0 M NaCl:
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

1000

100

10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Time (s)

Figure 4.14. Time sweep storage moduli, G’, measured at 37 C with a frequency of 1.0
Hz and a strain of 1.0 % for the sulfated hydrogels synthesized in 1.0 M NaCl solution.

202

Loss modulus, G'' (Pa)

In 1.0 M NaCl:
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

1000

100

10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Time (s)

Figure 4.15. Time sweep loss moduli, G”, measured at 37 C with a frequency of 1.0 Hz
and a strain of 1.0 % for the sulfated hydrogels synthesized in 1.0 M NaCl solution.

The frequency sweep storage and loss moduli were also carried out and plotted in Figure
4.16 and 4.17, respectively.

203

Storage modulus, G' (Pa)

In 1.0 M NaCl:
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

1000

100

10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Frequency (rad/s)

Figure 4.16. Frequency sweep storage moduli, G’, measured at 37 C with a strain of 1.0 %

Loss modulus, G" (Pa)

for the sulfated hydrogels synthesized in 1.0 M NaCl solution.

In 1.0 M NaCl:
S-7-3
S-6-4
S-5-5
S-4-6
S-3-7
S-2-8
S-1-9
S-0-10

1000

100

10

1

0

10

20

30

40

Frequency (rad/s)

204

50

Figure 4.17. Frequency sweep loss moduli, G”, measured at 37 C with a strain of 1.0 %
for the sulfated hydrogels synthesized in 1.0 M NaCl solution.

4.3.7

Papain release assay of nonsulfated hydrogels

While the goal of this work was to stabilize papain against heat burden, the release of
papain from hydrogels is important, as papain needs to exert its activity by direct contact
with external substances. The release of papain from the hydrogels was observed at room
temperature with a loading ratio of 1:10 (w/w) of papain to hydrogels.7b The papain loaded
hydrogels were lyophilized for the papain release assays after incubating for 24 h. A
phosphate buffer solution was added to initiate the passive diffusion of papain from the
hydrogels, and the release kinetics were monitored at different time intervals. While the
sorption and desorption can be observed for the nonsulfated hydrogels, the sulfated
hydrogels failed to desorb papain after sorption. This phenomenon can be attributed to the
electrostatic attractions between the anionic sulfated hydrogel and the cationic residues
from papain. In this case, only nonsulfated hydrogels were used for papain stabilization
assays.
A fast papain release was observed within the first 6 h for all nonsulfated hydrogels (Figure
4.18), and a complete release of papain was reached within 24 h. Similar release profiles
were also obtained for the papain loaded hydrogels that were not lyophilized but directly
released after incubation (Figure 4.19). Both profiles indicated the successful sorption of
papain by hydrogels and the recovery by passive diffusion.

205

Release percentage (%)

100

80

HO-0-10
HO-1-9
HO-2-8
HO-3-7
HO-4-6
HO-5-5
HO-6-4
HO-7-3
HO-8-2
HO-9-1

60

40

20

0

0

5

15

10

20

25

Time (h)

Figure 4.18. Release profile of papain from the nonsulfated hydrogels after loading and
lyophilization.

206

Release percentage (%)

100

80

HO-0-10
HO-1-9
HO-2-8
HO-3-7
HO-4-6
HO-5-5
HO-6-4
HO-7-3
HO-8-2
HO-9-1

60

40

20

0

0

5

15

10

20

25

Time (h)

Figure 4.19. Release profile of papain from the nonsulfated hydrogels after loading, but
withou lyophilization.

4.3.8

Papain heat burden assay of nonsulfated hydrogels

Oral delivery of papain using tablets and pills generally involves fabrication of papain into
a stable microenvironments, including microshperes37 and micro/nanoparticles,38 to ensure
papain’s stability through reducing papain mobility and exposure to moisture. Tablets and
pills are made from an extrusion spheronization technique,39 which involves five
operational steps; dry mixing, wet massing, extrusion, spheronization, and drying, of which
extrusion and spheronization are two key steps for the formation of tablets and pills. Both
steps require higher operational temperatures for a few minutes and moisture is also
207

required to exert a lubricant effect.40 Varca et al.41 evaluated a typical extrusion
spheronization technique used to produce papain pellets, and found that the biological
activity of papain was adversely affected by each step of the process, and the bioactivity of
the enzyme decreased from 10% to 50%. In our experiments, we loaded papain into
nonsulfated hydrogels and in a 1:10 ratio (w/w) of papain to hydrogel. The papain-loaded
hydrogels were then incubated at 25 C for 24 h before lyophilization. After lyophilization,
an equal amount of water to papain (w/w) was added to the papain loaded lyophilized
hydrogels. The wet hydrogels were incubated for another 24 h to reach equilibrium. Then,
they were exposed for heat burden assays, followed by papain activity assays by stressing
the enzyme under simulating conditions at 90 C for 5 min. While moisture is a necessary
for extrusion and spheronization as a lubricant, it should be noted that moisture can also
accelerate the activity decaying during the heat burden procedures. The relative papain
activity was based on the activity of a control papain solution (i.e., no hydrogel, no
lyophilization, no heating). The papain activities after the heat burden assay with each
hydrogel are shown in Figure 4.20.

208

Relative percent activity (%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

no
gel

HO9-1

HO8-2

HO7-3

HO- HO6-4 5-5

HO- HO4-6 3-7

HO2-8

HO1-9

HO0-10

Figure 4.20. Activities of papain from papain loaded hydrogels with (red) and without
(blue) heat burden by different nonsulfated hydrogels. No gel means the activity of papain
from a negative control assay without a hydrogel.

Only 50 % papain activity was observed in the absence of hydrogel protection, while the
activity increased to 70 % for the HO-9-1 hydrogel. Higher activities were obtained with
lower weight percent of the lactose monomer in the hydrogels. Indeed, although HO-0-10
hydrogel alone imparts stabilization of the enzyme, only a small amount of lactose
monomer is required for an improvement in retained enzyme activity. More than 90 % of
papain activity was retained for hydrogels from HO-5-5 to HO-1-9. The hydrogels
containing higher amounts of lactose groups result in lower retained papain activity
compared with those with lower lactose amounts. We believe that this phenomenon can be
209

explained by the strength of the hydrogels as defined by the storage moduli, the gel fraction
and the swelling ratio. Hydrogels with larger ratios of lactose monomer afford weaker gels
that presumably provide less protection for the enzyme at higher temperatures. As a
comparison, the papain activities from papain-loaded hydrogels without heat burden were
also measured, exhibiting more than 90 % activity for all hydrogels. These results
demonstrate successful papain stabilization by hydrogels against high temperatures, and
provide potential for industrial applications.

4.4 Conclusion
Lactose-containing hydrogels were produced by copolymerization of L06 or L07 with
HEAA with 1.0 wt % of the crosslinker. The weight percent of L06 was increased from 0
to 100 wt % in 10 % increments, and hydrogels were successfully obtained with up to 90
wt% of L06, confirmed using inverted vials and rheology, while while it is 70 wt% for L07.
The sulfated hydrogels were insensitive to pH values, but dependent on the ionic strength.
The nonsulfated hydrogels stabilized papain in the presence of high temperatures that
mimic those used in extrusion spheronization for pellet fabrication. While only 50 %
papain activity was observed in the absence of nonsulfated hydrogel protection, increasing
papain activities up to 95 % were retained using hydrogels. These nonsulfated hydrogels
might provide potential applications to stabilize other industrial important enzymes.

4.5 Experimental section
4.5.1

Materials and instruments

210

All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich except lactose (Matherson Coleman &
Bell Co). 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy was performed using a Bruker Ultrashield 400
MHz (100 MHz for 13C NMR) instrument. The obtained data were processed using
MestReNova software (version 6.1.0). Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR) were
collected on a Nicolet 6700 spectrometer and analyzed with OMNIC32 software. Mass
spectrometry was performed using a Micromass Q-TOF-2TM spectrometer. UV-vis
measurements were conducted with a Cary 50 Bio Spectrophotometer.
4.5.2

Synthesis of lactose containing monomers

Synthesis of compound L0242
Catalytic iodine (0.50 g, 0.067 equiv.) was added into a suspension solution of lactose
(10.00 g, 1.0 equiv.) and 50 mL acetic anhydride. This solution was stirred at room
temperature for 15 min before adding an excess of saturated sodium thiosulfate solution to
quench the reaction. Dichloromethane was added to extract the solution three times.
Saturated NaHCO3 solution was added into the organic layer until no bubbles formed. The
organic layer was separated, washed by brine and concentrated to give the desired product
as a white solid (19.60 g, 99 %). The structure was confirmed against that reported in the
literature.43
Synthesis of compound L0344
Benzyl amine (6.32 g, 2.0 equiv.) was added to a solution of L02 (20.00 g, 1.0 equiv.) in
200 mL THF. This solution was stirred at room temperature for 20 h before removing the
solvent. DCM was added to dissolve the residue and this solution was washed with 1.0 M
HCl three times, followed by saturated NaHCO3, brine, and dried over anhydrous sodium
sulfate. After concentration, the crude product was purified by flash column

211

chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1 to 1:2), giving the desired product as white solid
(18.00 g, 96 %). This structure was confirmed with the reported literature.44
Synthesis of compound L0444
L03 (8.97 g, 1.0 equiv.) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. After evacuating
and refilling with nitrogen for three times, 50 mL anhydrous DCM was injected, followed
by trichloroacetonitrile (10.17 g, 5.0 equiv.). This solution was cooled using an ice bath for
5 min before adding catalytic amount of DBU (0.21 g, 0.1 equiv.). The solution was
warmed to room temperature slowly within 3 h. Solvent was removed and the crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 3:2), giving
product as a light yellow solid 9.80 g (89 %). This structure was confirmed with the
reported literature.44
Synthesis of compound L05
L04 (37.5 g, 1.0 equiv.) and HEAA (13.8 g, 2.5 equiv.) were placed in a flame-dried round
bottom flask. After evacuating and refilling with nitrogen three times, 400 mL anhydrous
DCM was injected, followed by adding boron trifluoride diethyl etherate (12.2 mL, 46.5 %
BF3 basis, 2.0 equiv.). This solution was stirred at room temperature (20˚C) overnight.
Excess triethylamine was added to quench the reaction, and DCM was added to dilute the
solution. The solution was washed with 1.0 M HCl solution for three times, saturated
NaHCO3 and brine, then dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and concentrated. The crude
product was purified by flash column chromatography (hexanes:EtOAc = 1:1), giving
white solid product. Yield = 10.0 g (28 %).
1

H NMR (CDCl3, 400 MHz): δ (ppm) 6.30 (dd, J = 16.8, 1.6 Hz, 1 H), 6.13 (dd, J = 16.8,

10.4 Hz, 1 H), 5.65 (dd, J = 10.4, 1.6 Hz, 1 H), 5.35 (d, J = 3.6 Hz, 1 H), 5.20 (t, J = 9.6

212

Hz, 1 H), 5.11 (dd, J = 10.4, 8.0 Hz, 1 H), 4.97 (dd, J = 10.4, 3.6 Hz, 1 H), 4.89 (dd, J =
9.6, 8.0 Hz, 1 H), 4.54 (dd, J = 12.0, 2.0 Hz, 1 H), 4.49 (dd, J = 10.8, 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 4.17–
4.05 (m, 3 H), 3.90–3.87 (m, 1 H), 3.82–3.75 (m, 3 H), 3.64–3.45 (m, 3 H), 2.16, 2.13,
2.07, 2.05, 2.04, 1.97 (s, 21 H);
13

C NMR (CDCl3, 100 MHz): δ (ppm) 170.38, 170.26, 170.07, 169.97, 169.75, 169.61,

169.01, 165.55, 130.65, 126.44, 100.87, 100.66, 75.97, 72.72, 72.52, 71.50, 70.83, 70.53,
69.16, 69.02, 66.58, 61.80, 60.75, 39.19, 20.75, 20.67, 20.62, 20.52, 20.40;
FT-IR: (cm-1) 1737, 1668, 1367, 1212, 1035;
MS (TOF MS ESI): 756.2650 M+Na+ (Calculated: 756.2327 M+Na+).
Synthesis of compound L06
L05 (10.0 g) was placed in a flame-dried round bottom flask. 80 mL anhydrous methanol
was injected, followed by a catalytic amount of NaOMe/MeOH solution. This solution was
stirred at room temperature for 3 hours with the formation of a precipitate. The desired
product was obtained by filtration as a white solid (5.0 g, 84 %). This structure was
confirmed with the reported literature.26a, 29
Synthesis of compound L07
L06 (200 mg) and SO3/NMe3 complex (2.2 g, 35 equiv.) in 8.0 mL DMF was heated at 60
o

C for 12 h. After cooling to room temperature, the solvent was removed and methanol was

added to re-dissolve the residue, and the remaining solid was removed by filtration. The
filtrate was concentrated and purified on a Sephadex LH-20 column with methanol to
obtain the desired product L07 (390 mg, 87 %).26a, 29
4.5.3

Hydrogel synthesis

213

A mixture of L06 or L07, N-hydroxyethyl acrylamide, N,N'-methylenebis(acrylamide)
(MBAA, 1.0 wt%) and potassium persulfate (KPS, 1.0 wt%) were dissolved in deionized
water in a glass vial at an overall concentration of 100 mg/mL. This solution was purged
with nitrogen for 10 min before being heated at 70 C for 1 h to obtain the desired hydrogel.
The weight percent of L06 or L07 was increased from 0 to 100 % in increments of 10 %.
Hydrogels formed with up to 90% L06 or 70% L07 weight percent.
4.5.4

Gel fraction and swelling ratio measurement

The hydrogels were transferred to 250 mL beakers and immersed in deionized water for
one week for nonsulfated hydrogels to reach equilibrium, while 48 h for sulfated hydrogels.
The deionized water was replaced two times each day. The masses of swollen hydrogels
(m1) were measured, and the hydrogels were then lyophilized to obtain the dry masses
(m2). The swelling ratios were calculated based on the weight of the hydrogels by dividing
the absorbed deionized water over the dry gel samples, i.e. (m1-m2)/m2*100%. The gel
fractions were calculated by dividing the mass of the dry hydrogels over the feed-in mass
(0.505 g), i.e. m2/0.505*100%. Two measurements were carried out and average swelling
ratio was reported.
4.5.5

Rheological measurement

Rheological measurements were performed using a Discovery Series Hybrid Rheometer
(DHR) (Model HR-2, TA Instruments) under strain-controlled mode and fitted with a 20mm diameter Smart Swap flat geometry plate and insulating thermal cover. The
temperature was controlled using an Advanced Peltier System. To examine the rheological
properties, oscillatory time sweeps (1.0 Hz, 1 % strain, 37 C) and oscillatory frequency
sweeps (0.1–70 Hz; 1 % strain, 37 C) were performed.

214

4.5.6

Preparation of papain loaded hydrogels and papain release assays

Papain solution: Papain solution (10 mg/mL) was prepared by dissolving an appropriate
amount of papain in phosphate buffer solution (pH 6.2) containing 5 mM L-cysteine.
Papain loaded hydrogels: Dry hydrogels were ground into fine powders for papain release
and activity assays. Freshly prepared papain solution (100 μL, 10 mg/mL) was added to 10
mg of dried hydrogel in a glass vial, and the mixture was incubated at 25 C for 24 h. The
resulting papain loaded hydrogels were lyophilized to obtain a white powder to test the
papain release. For direct papain release, no lyophilization was required.
Papain release assay: Six parallel solutions were prepared by adding 2.5 mL phosphate
buffer solution (pH 6.2) containing 5 mM L-cysteine to the lyophilized hydrogels. 2.4 mL
phosphate buffer solution was added for direct papain release without lyophilization). At
time intervals of 0.5, 1.5, 3.5, 6.0, 9.0 and 24 h, one solution was filtered through filter
paper, and the filtrate was collected. The concentration of the released papain was
calculated from UV-vis measurements using a standard calibration curve. Each release
assay was carried out three times and average data are reported.
4.5.7

Heat burden assays for the papain loaded hydrogels

Papain loaded hydrogels: The papain solution (10 mg/mL) was prepared as described
above. Papain solution (250 μL, 10 mg/mL) was added to 25 mg of dry hydrogel in a glass
vial and incubated at 25 C for 24 h before lyophilization. The lyophilized hydrogels were
ground to obtain a white powder for papain heat burden assays. Control solutions of papain
were prepared and treated identically, except for the absence of hydrogel.
Heat burden assay: A 100 mL cysteine-versene buffer solution was prepared by dissolving
1.792 g sodium phosphate dibasic dodecahydrate, 0.610 g L-cysteine, and 1.40 g

215

ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in deionized water, and the solution adjusted to
pH 6.0. The lyophilized papain-loaded hydrogels were added equal amount of water as the
papain and incubated at 25 C for another 24 h, and then heated at 90 C for 5 min. After
heating, 10 mL cysteine-versene buffer solution was added, and the mixture was incubated
at 25 C for another 24 h before the activity of the papain was measured. Controlled assays
without hydrogels were also performed, including two positive control assays (no
lyophilization + no heat burden, and lyophilization + no heat burden), and one negative
control assay (lyophilization + heat burden).
4.5.8

Papain activity assay for heat burden hydrogels

The standard enzymatic activity assay was carried out according to the procedure of
Weetall and Mason17 by recording the absorbance at 280 nm in a Carey 50 Bio UV-vis
spectrophotometer. The control and heat burden hydrogels were passively released by
adding 10 mL cysteine-versene buffer solution and incubating at 25 C for 24 h. Hydrogels
were removed by filtration through a filter paper to obtain the released papain solutions.
The filtrate (5.0 mL) was incubated at 40 C for 10 min to reach equilibrium. The released
papain solution (2.0 mL) was added into the casein solution, inverted gently several times
to mix, and then incubated at 40 C for 1.0 h. Trichloroacetic acid solution (30 wt %, 3.0
mL) was added to quench the reaction, and the reaction mixture was incubated at 40 C for
another 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, the assay solution was filtered through
a Whatman #1 filter paper twice to remove all solids. The residual papain activity was
measured by the amount of hydrolyzed tyrosine as determined by spectrophotometry. The
baseline was obtained by mixing a casein solution (5.0 mL) with 3.0 mL trichloroacetic
acid solution (30 wt%) before adding 2.0 mL released papain solution. The relative papain

216

activity was based on the activity of a positive controlled papain solution (no lyophilization
+ no heat burden). Each activity assay was carried out three times and average data are
reported.

217

4.6 References
1.

Kirk, O.; Borchert, T. V.; Fuglsang, C. C., Industrial enzyme applications. Curr.

Opin. Biotechnol. 2002, 13 (4), 345-351.
2.

(a) Wang, W.; Nema, S.; Teagarden, D., Protein aggregation—Pathways and

influencing factors. Int. J. Pharm. 2010, 390 (2), 89-99; (b) Iyer, P. V.; Ananthanarayan, L.,
Enzyme stability and stabilization—Aqueous and non-aqueous environment. Process
Biochem. 2008, 43 (10), 1019-1032.
3.

(a) Klibanov, A. M., Stabilization of enzymes against thermal inactivation. Adv.

Appl. Microbiol. 1983, 29 (1), 28; (b) Somero, G. N., Proteins and Temperature. Annu. Rev.
Physiol. 1995, 57 (1), 43-68.
4.

Das, U.; Hariprasad, G.; Ethayathulla, A. S.; Manral, P.; Das, T. K.; Pasha, S.; Mann,

A.; Ganguli, M.; Verma, A. K.; Bhat, R.; Chandrayan, S. K.; Ahmed, S.; Sharma, S.; Kaur,
P.; Singh, T. P.; Srinivasan, A., Inhibition of Protein Aggregation: Supramolecular
Assemblies of Arginine Hold the Key. PLOS One 2007, 2 (11), e1176.
5.

Broering, J. M.; Bommarius, A. S., Evaluation of Hofmeister Effects on the Kinetic

Stability of Proteins. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109 (43), 20612-20619.
6.

DeSantis, G.; Jones, J. B., Chemical modification of enzymes for enhanced

functionality. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 1999, 10 (4), 324-330.
7.

(a) Chan, L.; Cross, H. F.; She, J. K.; Cavalli, G.; Martins, H. F. P.; Neylon, C.,

Covalent Attachment of Proteins to Solid Supports and Surfaces via Sortase-Mediated
Ligation. PLOS One 2007, 2 (11), e1164; (b) Lee, J.; Ko, J. H.; Lin, E.-W.; Wallace, P.;
Ruch, F.; Maynard, H. D., Trehalose hydrogels for stabilization of enzymes to heat. Polym.
Chem. 2015, 6 (18), 3443-3448.

218

8.

(a) Kumar, S.; Tsai, C.-J.; Nussinov, R., Factors enhancing protein thermostability.

Protein Eng. 2000, 13 (3), 179-191; (b) Mooers, B. H. M.; Datta, D.; Baase, W. A.; Zollars,
E. S.; Mayo, S. L.; Matthews, B. W., Repacking the Core of T4 Lysozyme by Automated
Design. J. Mol. Biol. 2003, 332 (3), 741-756.
9.

Weiss, J.; Gibis, M.; Schuh, V.; Salminen, H., Advances in ingredient and

processing systems for meat and meat products. Meat Sci. 2010, 86 (1), 196-213.
10.

Flanagan, R.; Jones, A., Fab Antibody Fragments. Drug Saf. 2004, 27 (14), 1115-

1133.
11.

Khaparde, S. S.; Singhal, R. S., Chemically modified papain for applications in

detergent formulations. Bioresour. Technol. 2001, 78 (1), 1-4.
12.

Salis, A.; Monduzzi, M.; Solinas, V.; Polaina, J.; MacCabe, A. P., Industrial

Enzymes: Structure Function and Applications. Springer: 2007.
13.

(a) Solís-Mendiola, S.; Rojo-Domínguez, A.; Hernández-Arana, A., Cooperativity

in the unfolding transitions of cysteine proteinases. Calorimetric study of the heat
denaturation of chymopapain and papain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Protein Struct. Mol.
Enzymol. 1993, 1203 (1), 121-125; (b) Sumner, I. G.; Harris, G. W.; Taylor, M. A. J.;
Pickersgill, R. W.; Owen, A. J.; Goodenough, P. W., Factors effecting the thermostability
of cysteine proteinases from Carica papaya. Eur. J. Biochem. 1993, 214 (1), 129-134; (c)
Qadeer, A.; Zaman, M.; Khan, R. H., Inhibitory effect of post-micellar SDS concentration
on thermal aggregation and activity of papain. Biochemistry (Moscow) 2014, 79 (8), 785796; (d) Hernández-Arana, A.; Soriano-García, M., Detection and characterization by
circular dichroism of a stable intermediate state formed in the thermal unfolding of papain.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Protein Struct. Mol. Enzymol. 1988, 954, 170-175; (e) Tiktopulo,

219

E. I.; Privalov, P. L., Papain denaturation is not a two-state transition. FEBS Lett. 1978, 91
(1), 57-58; (f) Rašković, B.; Popović, M.; Ostojić, S.; Anđelković, B.; Tešević, V.; Polović,
N., Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy provides an evidence of papain denaturation
and aggregation during cold storage. Spectrochim. Acta Part A 2015, 150, 238-246.
14.

Sathish, H. A.; Kumar, P. R.; Prakash, V., Mechanism of solvent induced thermal

stabilization of papain. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2007, 41 (4), 383-390.
15.

Lozano, P.; Cano, J.; Iborra, J.; Manjón, A., Influence of polyhydroxylic cosolvents

on papain thermostability. Enzyme Microb. Tech. 1993, 15 (10), 868-873.
16.

Lee, J. C.; Timasheff, S. N., The stabilization of proteins by sucrose. J. Biol. Chem.

1981, 256 (14), 7193-7201.
17.

(a) Weetall, H. H., Storage stability of water-insoluble enzymes covalently coupled

to organic and inorganic carriers. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Enzymol. 1970, 212 (1), 1-7; (b)
Weetall, H. H.; Mason, R. D., Studies on immobilized papain. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1973,
15 (3), 455-466.
18.

He, F.; Zhuo, R.; Liu, L.; Xu, M., Studies on the preparation and characterization

of immobilized papain. Acta Polym. Sin. 2000, 5, 023.
19.

Ganapathy, R.; Manolache, S.; Sarmadi, M.; Denes, F., Immobilization of papain

on cold-plasma functionalized polyethylene and glass surfaces. J. Biomater. Sci., Polym.
Ed. 2001, 12 (9), 1027-1049.
20.

Afaq, S.; Iqbal, J., Immobilization and stabilization of papain on chelating

sepharose: a metal chelate regenerable carrier. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 2001, 4 (3), 1-2.
21.

Li, F.-Y.; Xing, Y.-J.; Ding, X., Immobilization of papain on cotton fabric by sol–

gel method. Enzyme Microb. Tech. 2007, 40 (7), 1692-1697.

220

22.

(a) Kilinc, A.; Onal, S.; Telefoncu, A., Stabilization of papain by modification with

chitosan. Turk. J. Chem. 2002, 26 (3), 311-316; (b) Lin, H.; Wang, H.; Xue, C.; Ye, M.,
Preparation of chitosan oligomers by immobilized papain. Enzyme Microb. Tech. 2002, 31
(5), 588-592.
23.

Choudhury, D.; Biswas, S.; Roy, S.; Dattagupta, J. K., Improving thermostability

of papain through structure-based protein engineering. Protein Eng., Des. Sel. 2010, 23 (6),
457-467.
24.

Sangeetha, K.; Abraham, T. E., Chemical modification of papain for use in alkaline

medium. J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym. 2006, 38 (3–6), 171-177.
25.

Arakawa, T.; Timasheff, S. N., Stabilization of protein structure by sugars.

Biochemistry 1982, 21 (25), 6536-6544.
26.

(a) Sun, X.-L.; Grande, D.; Baskaran, S.; Hanson, S. R.; Chaikof, E. L.,

Glycosaminoglycan Mimetic Biomaterials. 4. Synthesis of Sulfated Lactose-Based
Glycopolymers That Exhibit Anticoagulant Activity. Biomacromolecules 2002, 3 (5),
1065-1070; (b) Huang, Y.; Shaw, M. A.; Mullins, E. S.; Kirley, T. L.; Ayres, N., Synthesis
and Anticoagulant Activity

of

Polyureas

Containing

Sulfated

Carbohydrates.

Biomacromolecules 2014, 15 (12), 4455-4466.
27.

(a) Zhou, W.-J.; Wilson, M. E.; Kurth, M. J.; Hsieh, Y.-L.; Krochta, J. M.;

Shoemaker, C. F., Synthesis and Properties of a Novel Water-Soluble Lactose-Containing
Polymer and Its Cross-Linked Hydrogel. Macromolecules 1997, 30 (23), 7063-7068; (b)
Zhou, W.-J.; Kurth, M. J.; Hsieh, Y.-L.; Krochta, J. M., Synthesis and thermal properties of
a

novel

lactose-containing

poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acrylamidolactamine)

hydrogel. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 1999, 37 (10), 1393-1402; (c) Lin, W.; Hu,

221

M.; Hsieh, Y.-L.; Kurth, M. J.; Krochta, J. M., Thermosensitive lactitol-based polyether
polyol (LPEP) hydrogels. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 1998, 36 (6), 979-984.
28.

(a) Guan, R.; Sun, X.-L.; Hou, S.; Wu, P.; Chaikof, E. L., A Glycopolymer

Chaperone for Fibroblast Growth Factor-2. Bioconjugate Chem. 2004, 15 (1), 145-151; (b)
Hou, S.; Sun, X.-L.; Dong, C.-M.; Chaikof, E. L., Facile Synthesis of Chain-End
Functionalized Glycopolymers for Site-Specific Bioconjugation. Bioconjugate Chem.
2004, 15 (5), 954-959.
29.

Sun, X.-L.; Faucher, K. M.; Houston, M.; Grande, D.; Chaikof, E. L., Design and

Synthesis of Biotin Chain-Terminated Glycopolymers for Surface Glycoengineering. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2002, 124 (25), 7258-7259.
30.

Nagasawa, N.; Yagi, T.; Kume, T.; Yoshii, F., Radiation crosslinking of

carboxymethyl starch. Carbohydr. Polym. 2004, 58 (2), 109-113.
31.

Ebara, M.; Kotsuchibashi, Y.; Uto, K.; Aoyagi, T.; Kim, Y.-J.; Narain, R.; Idota, N.;

Hoffman, J. M., Smart Hydrogels. In Smart Biomaterials, Springer: 2014; pp 9-65.
32.

(a) Miyata, T.; Uragami, T.; Nakamae, K., Biomolecule-sensitive hydrogels. Adv.

Drug Delivery Rev. 2002, 54 (1), 79-98; (b) Magda, J.; Cho, S.-H.; Streitmatter, S.;
Jevremovic, T., Effects of gamma rays and neutron irradiation on the glucose response of
boronic acid-containing “smart” hydrogels. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2014, 99, 219-222; (c)
Wang, Y.; Papadimitrakopoulos, F.; Burgess, D. J., Polymeric “smart” coatings to prevent
foreign body response to implantable biosensors. J. Controlled Release 2013, 169 (3), 341347; (d) Troïani, D.; Dion, J. R.; Burns, D. H., Ultrasonic quantification using smart
hydrogel sensors. Talanta 2011, 83 (5), 1371-1375; (e) Matsumoto, A.; Ishii, T.; Nishida,
J.; Matsumoto, H.; Kataoka, K.; Miyahara, Y., A Synthetic Approach Toward a Self-

222

Regulated Insulin Delivery System. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2012, 51 (9), 2124-2128.
33.

(a) Rodrı́guez, R. a.; Alvarez-Lorenzo, C.; Concheiro, A., Cationic cellulose

hydrogels: kinetics of the cross-linking process and characterization as pH-/ion-sensitive
drug delivery systems. J. Controlled Release 2003, 86 (2–3), 253-265; (b) Qiu, Y.; Park,
K., Environment-sensitive hydrogels for drug delivery. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2012, 64,
Supplement, 49-60.
34.

(a) Hoffman, A. S., Stimuli-responsive polymers: Biomedical applications and

challenges for clinical translation. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2013, 65 (1), 10-16; (b) Hasnat
Kabir, M.; Hazama, T.; Watanabe, Y.; Gong, J.; Murase, K.; Sunada, T.; Furukawa, H.,
Smart hydrogel with shape memory for biomedical applications. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng.
2014, 45 (6), 3134-3138; (c) Maitz, M. F.; Freudenberg, U.; Tsurkan, M. V.; Fischer, M.;
Beyrich, T.; Werner, C., Bio-responsive polymer hydrogels homeostatically regulate blood
coagulation. Nature Communication 2013, 4 (2168).
35.

(a) Knipe, J. M.; Peppas, N. A., Multi-responsive hydrogels for drug delivery and

tissue engineering applications. 2014; Vol. 1, p 57-65; (b) Fujita, M.; Ishihara, M.; Simizu,
M.; Obara, K.; Ishizuka, T.; Saito, Y.; Yura, H.; Morimoto, Y.; Takase, B.; Matsui, T.;
Kikuchi, M.; Maehara, T., Vascularization in vivo caused by the controlled release of
fibroblast growth factor-2 from an injectable chitosan/non-anticoagulant heparin hydrogel.
Biomaterials 2004, 25 (4), 699-706.
36.

Freitas, R. F. S.; Cussler, E. L., Temperature sensitive gels as extraction solvents.

Chem. Eng. Sci. 1987, 42 (1), 97-103.
37.

Sharma, M.; Sharma, V.; Panda, A. K.; Majumdar, D. K., Enteric Microsphere

Formulations of Papain for Oral Delivery. Yakugaku Zasshi 2011, 131 (5), 697-709.

223

38.

(a) Sharma, M.; Sharma, V.; Panda, A. K.; Majumdar, D. K., Development of

enteric submicron particle formulation of papain for oral delivery. Int. J. Nanomed. 2011,
6, 2097-2111; (b) Müller, C.; Leithner, K.; Hauptstein, S.; Hintzen, F.; Salvenmoser, W.;
Bernkop-Schnürch, A.,

Preparation

and

characterization

of

mucus-penetrating

papain/poly(acrylic acid) nanoparticles for oral drug delivery applications. J. Nanopart.
Res. 2012, 15 (1), 1-13.
39.

Sousa, J. J.; Sousa, A.; Podczeck, F.; Newton, J. M., Factors influencing the

physical characteristics of pellets obtained by extrusion-spheronization. Int. J. Pharm.
2002, 232 (1–2), 91-106.
40.

Vervaet, C.; Baert, L.; Remon, J. P., Extrusion-spheronisation A literature review.

Int. J. Pharm. 1995, 116 (2), 131-146.
41.

Varca, G. H. C.; Lopes, P. S.; Ferraz, H. G., Development of papain containing

pellets produced by extrusion–spheronization: an operational stage approach. Drug Dev.
Ind. Pharm. 2015, 41 (3), 430-435.
42.

Kartha, K. P. R.; Field, R. A., Iodine: A versatile reagent in carbohydrate chemistry

IV. per-O-acetylation, regioselective acylation and acetolysis. Tetrahedron 1997, 53 (34),
11753-11766.
43.

Wang, R.; Steensma, D. H.; Takaoka, Y.; Yun, J. W.; Kajimoto, T.; Wong, C. H., A

search for pyrophosphate mimics for the development of substrates and inhibitors of
glycosyltransferases. Biorg. Med. Chem. 1997, 5 (4), 661-672.
44.

(a) Moynihan, H. A.; Hayes, J. A.; Eccles, K. S.; Coles, S. J.; Lawrence, S. E.,

Hydrogen bonding in crystal forms of primary amide functionalised glucose and cellobiose.
Carbohydr. Res. 2013, 374, 29-39; (b) Ruff, Y.; Buhler, E.; Candau, S. J.; Kesselman, E.;

224

Talmon, Y.; Lehn, J. M., Glycodynamers: Dynamic Polymers Bearing Oligosaccharides
Residues - Generation, Structure, Physicochemical, Component Exchange, and Lectin
Binding Properties. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132 (8), 2573-2584.

225

