Critical Literacy:
Exploring Topics of Sexuality and Gender with Young Children

A dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School
of the University of Cincinnati
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of

Doctor of Education

in the Department of Education
of the College of Education, Criminal Justice, and Human Services

by

Becky L. Bridgman

M.Ed. University of Cincinnati
June 2008
Committee Chair: Connie Kendall Theado, Ph.D.

ABSTRACT
This qualitative study grounded in critical literacy and queer theory investigated three
elementary students along with myself, assuming the role as teacher to explore how topics
related to sexuality and gender could occur through literary conversations. The first purpose was
to focus on how young children respond to LGBTQ-themed representations within children’s
texts via critical literacy. Three participant responses were noted toward LGBTQ-themed
children’s literature and to the topic of sexuality and gender in general: (1) Student Rejects, (2)
Student Replicates, or (3) Student Recreates. The second purpose was to examine how the
researcher, assuming the role of teacher, could enact critical literacy with a focus on sexuality
and gender. Two findings were noted: (1) Focusing on Power, and (2) Teaching Critical
Language. Focusing on Power included recognizing the significance of incorporating diverse
texts as well as directing the participants’ attention to the various representations in the texts.
Teaching Critical Language entailed the importance of modeling critical language through
posing questions and encouraging participants to make personal connections. A cross-case
analysis underscored that participants produced four similar responses: (1) family is not
heterosexually or homosexually limiting, (2) questioning the concept of not marrying, (3)
resisting representations of princesses, particularly boy princesses and (4) using critical literacy
to insert individual and meaningful topics. The differences among the participants were: (1) the
individual and unique vies about family structures and (2) the participants’ views according to
color preferences and gender. This study has implications for future research as well as
demonstrates how schools, including teachers and students, can assist each other in exploring
subjectivity by questioning the normative practice and ideologies portrayed in text through
literacy conversations and thus support equity and social justice.

ii

Copyright by
Becky L. Bridgman

2016

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
It is with immense gratitude that I acknowledge the outstanding support and assistance of the
chair of my committee, Dr. Connie Kendall Theado. She continually provided me support over
the six years of my study both academically and personally. She not only believed in me and
inspired me to take on new heights but also graciously worked alongside the various committee
members who guided me over this journey. This dissertation serves as an example of how an
exceptional mentor and advisor can direct a graduate student through her next steps. I have
greatly appreciated her advice as a mentor, but also as a friend who witnessed some of my most
significant life changes. Next, it gives me great pleasure to equally acknowledge Dr. Cheri
Williams whose phenomenal teaching and guidance academically challenged me to strive for
greater heights. She has also served as a great friend reminding me to not overlook the essential
elements of life: family and friends. Thirdly, I consider it an honor to work with Dr. Caitlin L.
Ryan who kindly accepted to join my committee after having only spoken to me once on the
phone. You have been very generous with your time and remained flexible over the course of my
study.
I also wish to acknowledge in a most significant way my intelligent and creative daughter —
Emma Bridgman-George —who continues to inspire me every day to make the world a better
place for all families. Second, I would like to thank my encouraging co-parent Dr. Thérèse
Migraine-George who graciously supported me during the first years of my doctorate. Finally, I
would like to thank my remarkable spouse, Tracy Bridgman, who stood beside me during the
entire dissertation process and when questioned whether she could handle the journey, simply
responded: “That’s what you do when you love someone.”
In closing, I dedicate this dissertation to the people above, to my parents, and to the wonderful
participants and research site directors whom I have had the honor of walking alongside. Each of
you has touched my life and given me inspiration in ways which I cannot express in words. I
merely hope to pay it forward in the years to come.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
ABSTRACT

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

iv

CHAPTER 1- INTRODUCTION

1

Statement of Research Problem

4

Purpose of the Study and Research Questions

6

Positionality of Researcher

7

Conceptual Frameworks: Critical Literacy and Queer Theory

9

Knowledge Gained From Pilot Study

12

Definition of Key Terms

14

Significance and Rationale for Study

18

Summary

22

CHAPTER 2- RELEVANT LITERATURE & CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORKS

23

Relevant Literature

23

Conceptual Frameworks

32

Critical Literacy

32

Queer Theory

40

Contradictions: Queer Theory and Critical Literacy

44

Benefits of Merging /Applying Critical Literacy and Queer Theory

47

CHAPTER 3- METHOD

50

Validity and Trustworthiness

50

Overview of Research Questions & Design of the Study

52

v

Data Collection and Sources

63

Situating the Collective Case Study within the Frameworks

69

Role of Researcher: Ethnical Considerations

74

Data Analysis Summary and Charts

75

CHAPTER 4- CASE STUDY FINDINGS

83

Case 1: Page

84

Summary

100

Case 2: Jerry

101

Summary

122

Case 3: Hank

123

Summary

136

Case 4: Teacher and Researcher

137

Summary

147

CHAPTER 5-DISCUSSION AND CROSS-CASE ANALYSIS

148

Analysis through a Critical Literacy and Queer Theory Lens

148

Page

150

Jerry

157

Hank

163

Teacher and Researcher

169

Cross-Case Analysis

173

Similarities

175

Significance of Similarities

179

Differences

181

vi

Significance of Differences

182

Summary

184

CHAPTER 6- CONCLUSION

186

Summary of the Findings

190

Implications

193

Pedagogical

194

Research

196

Limitations

198

Recommendations for Future Research

199

REFERENCES

202

APPENDIX A

221

APPENDIX B

222

APPENDIX C

223

APPENDIX D

224

APPENDIX E

225

APPENDIX F

226

APPENDIX G

227

APPENDIX H

228

APPENDIX I

229

APPENDIX J

230

APPENDIX K

231

APPENDIX L

232

APPENDIX M

233

vii

APPENDIX N

234

APPENDIX O

235

APPENDIX P

236

APPENDIX Q

237

APPENDIX R

238

APPENDIX S

239

APPENDIX T

240

APPENDIX U

241

APPENDIX V

242

APPENDIX W

243

APPENDIX X

244

APPENDIX Y

245

APPENDIX Z

246

viii

Chapter 1
Introduction
The first time I enrolled my daughter, Emma, into daycare at the age of 18 months I
pondered how she would navigate herself as a young child with two mothers in this learning
environment. Within six months, one of her classmates similar in age announced while standing
in the middle of the room: “One of Emma’s moms is here.” This classmate then proceeded to
move toward the exit gate seeking confirmation about my daughter’s family structure, glaring
directly at me, and asserting, “She has two mommies?” By the age of three, my daughter could
effortlessly articulate that she had two mommies. As she continued to develop, I observed how
she managed to make sense of her family structure while mainly being offered heteronormative
representations within the school environment and within society in general. At four, she
resorted to using animals to construct her pretend family. I was the “Mommy” but in play, I
became Mommy Giraffe, Mommy Pig or Mommy Crocodile. The other mother, referred to as
“Mama” became Daddy Giraffe, Daddy Pig, or Daddy Crocodile. Emma would often adopt the
role of “baby” and would request to be called Baby Giraffe, Baby Pig or Baby Crocodile. The
need to define the role of Daddy persistently presented itself through Emma’s play even though
this presence did not exist in her home environment. These roles remained consistent and we did
not challenge the representations placed upon us. Although Emma was exposed to diverse
representations at an early age within the home, she continued to demonstrate her awareness of
how society categorized men and women both in regards to sexuality and gender.
It was apparent that the heteronormative representations offered to her via school and
society affected how she sought to align herself and her family. In view of the fact that I believe
that education can play an important role in either reproducing or challenging unequal structures
of power in society, I designed this collective case study with the desire to explore literary
1

conversations between the teacher and students focused on sexuality and gender as a way to
encourage curriculum change that supports equity and social justice practices at the elementary
school level.
Situating Sexuality and Gender in Schools: Politics and Pedagogy
Influenced by historical tensions concerning sexuality and gender, heteronormative
perspectives remain embedded within the teacher recruitment process, curriculum, student
conduct codes, approval of extra-curricular activities and after school programs (Clifford, 1989;
Harbeck, 1997; Lugg, 2003). The degree to which heteronormativity permeates most schools is
perhaps best illustrated within certain key historical moments. In the early 19th century, when
sexologists classified two types of sexualities— heterosexuality and homosexuality—
homosexuality by default became the socially deviant classification as it did not support
procreation thus creating the homogenous heterosexual culture (Hocquenghem, 1978; Pinar,
1998). Classifying people according to their sexuality not only placed heterosexuals as the
dominant group, but also facilitated in justifications for prosecuting and bullying homosexuals
(Hocquenghem, 1978; Pinar, 1998). Gender expression played an important role in identifying a
person as homosexual or heterosexual. Individuals who demonstrated heterosexual behavior
received heterosexual recognition and those who did not were homosexuals (Clifford, 1989,
Lugg, 2003). Following these classifications, sexologists later proclaimed that children’s sexual
orientation are “at risk” causing schools to securitize for pernicious homosexuals. By the 1950s,
the educational administration was male dominated and married; single women affected by
gender expectations were ideologically compelled to marry, and students understood that
heterosexuality was the only sexuality that did not carry stigmas or discrimination (Lugg, 2003).
The sexual hysteria placed on teachers trickled down to students and to the curriculum. Sexual

2

education courses did not appear within the school system until the late eighties (Lugg, 2003),
and in the case of Montgomery County of Maryland schools, it was required that health teachers
suggested reparative therapy or sexually transmitted diseases within in the context of
homosexuality (Vail, 2005).
In Queens, New York, during the 1990s, there was a recommendation for an elementary
curriculum guide titled Children of the Rainbow that focused on tolerance towards different
cultures, including LGBTQ (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer) people. Many parents
and community members objected to the curriculum guide based on three pages which included
representations of LGBTQ individuals along with three supplementary gay-friendly children’s
books. As a result, one school district accounting for 2700 students rejected the curriculum
guide, and four other districts omitted the sections pertaining exclusively to homosexuality
(Besner & Spungin, 1995, Whitson, 1992).
Another factor to consider is the various interpretations of the first amendment and its
role in censoring representations related to diverse sexuality and gender expression in schools
Whitson (1992). For instance, in one court ruling (Zyan v. Warsaw, 1980), the court ruled in
favor of granting the school board members the final word about which books supported their
political, social, or moral viewpoints. Books not suited to their position were to be removed from
classrooms or the library. In doing so, this case signified that school officials had almost
unlimited authority to censor courses, materials, and the curriculum. More recently, some
schools censor any type of instruction or activities portraying the LGBTQ lifestyle in a positive
manner by enacting No Promo Homo policies (Hanlon, 2009) and approximately 39 states
refused to enact laws which would protect LGBTQ students from harassment based on their
sexual orientation (Calefati, 2008).

3

The historical efforts to guard schools and classrooms from any positive LGBTQ
perspectives demonstrate poignantly the interlinking of pedagogy and politics and the struggle of
whose viewpoints will ultimately prevail in the classroom. Blackburn (2012) asserts how
negative schools are for LGBTQ students as well as those with LGBTQ family members.
Consequently, there remains a significant degree of apprehension surrounding queer students or
those raised by LGBTQ parents for many schools (Mayo, 2014). The discussion to integrate
topics within the school context often elicits divisive and politically charged reactions, as
evidenced by the recent June 2014 debate in Ohio that required Catholic school teachers to sign
an anti-LGBTQ “morality cause” (Gettys, 2014) obliging teachers to not support LGBTQ
individuals. Other states, such as Tennessee, have equally demonstrated their dislike of
integrating LGBTQ topics into the school. For instance, public schools in Tennessee (Curve,
2009) blocked websites containing the keyword “LGBTQ”. In a 2013 survey conducted by the
Gay, Lesbian, Straight Education Network (GLSEN) less than two students out of ten students
reported that they were provided with positive representations about LGBTQ people in the
classroom. In sum, students learn powerful lessons about sexuality and gender by the ways in
which schools and teachers validate or silence LGBTQ individuals in the classroom (Blackburn,
2012; Blount, 2000; Birden, 2005).
Statement of the Research Problem
Children’s literature, a staple in early childhood classrooms, advances certain normative
beliefs and offers a world view about how males and females should interact in the world and
with each other (Crisp & Hiller, 2011). Most children’s literature, and in particular those texts
that are used in the classroom, and during storytime, support a heteronormative perspective of
society (Rowell, 2007). Offering only normative representations of sexuality and gender in the

4

classroom implicitly suggests that lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT) people either do
not exist or that they are not worth mentioning (Daniel, 2007; Janmohamed, 2010).
Consequently, by offering mostly heteronormative perspectives, schools not only fail to take a
proactive stance towards homophobia (Blackburn & Clark, 2011) but also support a type of
hidden curriculum which denies positive representations about diverse sexuality and gender
(Sears, 1991).
Some critical literacy scholars (Burns, 2009; Harste, 2000, Leland & al, 2005; Vasquez,
2010) assert the importance of reconceptualizing storytime, a staple in most elementary
classrooms, to include a critical literacy approach. Adopting a critical literacy approach with a
focus on sexuality and gender, for instance, would encourage readers to examine the text beyond
the words and pictures of LGBTQ-themed and non-LGBTQ themed texts with the goal of
interpreting the text in relation to the author’s purpose, message, and its overall place within
society. Harste (2000) believes that engaging children in conversations which invite them to
examine the effects of otherness encourages children to examine the world from a different
perspective. Harste demonstrates how she utilized a critical literacy approach by reading books
aloud versus enacting the conventional tenets of storytime which required children to decode the
overall idea. Leland, Harste, and Huber (2005) further state that what is missing in most
elementary classrooms is the involvement of young learners engaging in a deeper process which
requires them to analyze and critique the messages around them. Children who experience and
engage in a critical literacy approach not only learn how to read between the lines but also are
able to produce alternative explanations for the author’s purpose (Leland et al., 2005).
Researchers, focused on sexuality and gender, have found that some adults believe that
by discussing sexuality and gender with children it promotes the loss of childhood innocence

5

(Blaise, 2009; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007). Yet sexuality and gender representations are readily
available through media, family, and friends (Hanlon, 2009). Ryan, Patraw, and Bednar (2013)
have argued that many educators do not feel comfortable addressing diverse gender notions.
Curriculums which only offer heteronormative perspectives can deny children the chance to see
family and friends who exhibit gender creativity, defy gender norms, or identify as lesbian, gay,
or bisexual in a positive manner. Since education can play an important role in either
reproducing or challenging unequal structures of power in society, critical readings focused on
gender and sexuality not only allow children to expand their viewpoints regarding men and
women but also work to support equal representation and social justice perspectives towards
individuals and their families.
Although some early childhood researchers and literacy scholars have recommended
introducing topics of sexuality and gender in the primary grades (Blaise, 2009; Blackburn &
Clark, 2011; Davies, 2003; DePalma & Atkinson, 2009; Hall, 2008; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007,
2010; Janmohamed, 2010; Rice, 2002; Rowell, 2007, Letts & Sears, 1999, Schall & Kauffman,
2003), very few research studies have focused directly on critically reading LGBTQ-themed with
elementary students or have offered a cross-case analysis of the participants responses to the
topic of sexuality and gender (Hall, 2008; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007, 2010; Souto-Manning &
Hermann-Wilmarth, 2008).
Purpose of the Study and Research Questions
This study investigated young children’s responses to LGBTQ-themed children’s
literature using a critical reading approach enacted by the researcher serving as the teacher. The
term, critical reading, is defined for the purposes of this study as analyzing, discussing, and
comparing the LGBTQ and non-LGBTQ representations presented in multiple texts, including

6

children’s literature and television shows (Comber, 2013, 2005, 2001; Janks, 1993, Vasquez,
2010). A critical reading approach thus views texts as neither neutral nor apolitical artifacts, but
rather every text carries a message through its words or illustrations. For this reason, a critical
literacy theoretical framework guided the study and was enacted through approaches similar to
critical pedagogical practices (Comber, 2005; Hagood, 2002; Janks, 1993; Vasquez 2010).
The overall purpose of the study was to examine how young children respond, both
verbally and nonverbally, to critical readings of LGBTQ-themed children’s literature as a way to
explore their thinking about sexuality and gender and add to the limited body of scholarship that
supports curriculum change directed toward integrating these topics at the elementary level. The
study was guided by the following questions:
1. How do young children respond, verbally and non-verbally, to LGBTQ
representations within children’s texts via a critical literacy approach?
2. How can critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender be enacted by the
researcher assuming the role as teacher?
Positionality of Researcher
According to Maxwell (2013), a researcher must consider the role that her or his
personal, practical, and intellectual objectives play in the study. For these reasons, I acknowledge
that I am a lesbian mother of a young child committed to making schools and, specifically,
elementary schools, a more inclusive place for LGBTQ students or those raised by LGBTQ
parents. Given my position, my research goals continually work toward providing children with
equal opportunities by ensuring access to resources that validate LGBTQ individuals, such as
their family members or themselves, and engaging in positive conversations about LGBTQ
individuals within the school context.

7

Additionally, I bring the insights gained from my pilot study, in which I examined a
group of preschoolers participating in read alouds of LGBTQ-themed literature (Bridgman,
2012). At the onset of my pilot study, I entered the research site with the conviction that notions
about diverse sexuality and gender could be constructed alongside heterosexual representations. I
intended to represent LGBTQ people and their families “as is”— another element of society—
meaning that I had planned not to highlight the nontraditional family structure. After a few
observations, however, I recognized that young children already possessed a wealth of
knowledge regarding gender and sexuality, specifically representations related to heterosexual
families. This realization caused me to immediately realign myself with a critical perspective,
which aims to challenge existing power structures and expand ideologies (Cushman, Kintgen,
Kroll, & Rose, 2001; Freire, 1970/2000).
In doing so, I turned to the work of Vasquez (2004) who in her book, Negotiating Critical
Literacies with Young Children, claimed that preschoolers are capable of successfully engaging
in critical literacies by examining assumptions about society, as well as questioning their own
perspectives about texts. Daniel and Auriac (2011), researchers of educational philosophy of
children, argue that we are not inherently born as critical thinkers, critical thinking is a learned
process. Second, as cited by Hagood (2002), since critical literacy is located between social
theory and the sociology of reading, literacy equally becomes a political practice affected by
social, cultural, and historical factors (Barton & Hamilton, 2000; Street, 1995). By becoming
critical thinkers, children are able to examine the interplay between society and literacy by
understanding the influence on the construction of texts, textual meanings, and the formation of
self, such as the heteronormative representations offered to children in most children’s literature.
Critical thinking as a process requires repetition and skills on behalf of the teacher to guide

8

elementary students in their elaboration and analysis of a problem. The study, therefore, was
guided by critical literacy theory as a means of implementing critical practices at the elementary
level.
Conceptual Framework: Critical Literacy and Queer Theory
The study relied on two conceptual frameworks: critical literacy and queer theory. Both
theories equally guided the data analysis and assisted in selecting data suited to answering the
research questions. Each framework is discussed below in further detail outlining how each was
used in collecting and interpreting the data.
Critical Literacy
Critical literacy served as one of the study’s theoretical framework. Critical literacy is
consistent with Freire’s (1970/2000) notion of libratory education which encourages the student
to make inquiries about all taken-for granted values, ideas, norms, and so forth (Sargis, 2008).
Likewise, critical literacy encourages the student to become aware of how the written language
and supplied representations in the text promotes a particular ideology (Bloome & Talkwaker,
1997). In the case of elementary students, critical literacy allows young children to enjoy the text
while evaluating the social construction of it, asking questions such as what representations are
present and which are not (Harwood, 2008).Unlike the majority of scholars employing critical
literacy, Vasquez (2004, 2007) primarily studies young children using critical literacy.
Informed by Comber (2005) and Vasquez (2010), this study used language and literacy as
an approach to explore ideologies governing sexuality and gender in society through critical
readings similar to storytime within a classroom. Freire (1970/2000) and hooks (1994) maintain
that the dissemination of knowledge coincides with implementing certain ideologies and
viewpoints. Reading heteronormative children’s literature thus coincides with implementing

9

certain ideologies governing sexuality and gender. Examining data through a critical literacy lens
permitted me to adopt a contextualized viewpoint as well as to account for the explicit and
implicit power dynamics within the classroom. A critical literacy lens thus facilitated a closer
examination of the social valorization of heterosexuality over homosexuality within the school
context (Birden, 2005; DePalma & Atkinson, 2009).
In this study, critical literacy involved examining society’s views regarding sexuality and
gender to better understand the connection between language and power (Janks, 1993).
Additionally, critical literacy was an approach used to demonstrate how language and literacy
categorizes people as either aligning with the status quo (e.g., those most represented in texts) or
positioned them as outcasts (e.g., minimal to no representations). Through evaluating the
missing voices of texts readily available to young children, via children’s literature or pop
culture (e.g., children’s television programs), critical literacy supports examining social issues
such as race, class, sexuality and gender.
Exploring topics of sexuality and gender by means of examining LGBTQ-themed texts
aligns with critical literacy in several ways. First, critical literacy validates young children as
capable and willing to engage in social justice issues (Vasquez, 2004 2007). Second, critical
literacy demonstrates how our understanding of the world is socially constructed and in turn can
be lacking in multicultural and diverse representations (Vasquez, 2004; 2007). By applying
critical literacy to the study, I was able to consider how students navigated their position in the
classroom as well as situated themselves in relation to diverse representations in the texts
(Larson & Marsch, 2005). Lastly, to explore ideologies governing sexuality and gender in
society, I relied on language and literacy as a way to exercise power in the classroom by
modeling how to examine readily available texts in schools (Comber, 2005). Using critical

10

literacy required exploring multiple texts and teaching participants that all texts portrayed a
particular perspective about the world which might be similar to or different from personal
viewpoints and experiences of their own.
In this study, the tenets of critical literacy refer to the overall philosophy and purpose of
critical literacy and are defined as (a) focusing on power that encouraged reflection,
transformation, or action (b) focusing on the issue and its complexity (c) using dynamic and
adaptable pedagogical techniques according to the context and perspectives of students, and (d)
examining multiple viewpoints of critical literacy, such as production of identity and
construction of subjectivity (DeVoogd, 2004; Hagood, 2002;Quintero, 2009; Vasquez, 2010 ). In
sum, a critical literacy approach refers to the action of the teacher or student implementing the
tenets of critical literacy. This theory is further discussed in chapter two.
Queer Theory
The second theoretical framework supporting this study is queer theory. Queer theory
promotes various perspectives on what normal means to various people (Britzman, 1995) and
thus deconstructs rigid binaries to uncover the complexities connected to sexuality and gender
(Oswald et al., 2005). Many books and, in particular, young children’s books depict females as
nurturing feminine individuals, attentive to fashion and home, while males are portrayed as
masculine, outspoken, and heroic (Martino & Mellor, 2000). These types of representations can
limit children’s knowledge about how men and women act in society as well as uphold
stereotypical beliefs.
Ryan and Hermann-Wilmarth (2013) reported on how queer theory had been used to
examine multiple texts and thus is an equally appropriate theory for examining children’s
literature. In line with critical literacy, queer theory recognizes that each book carries a message

11

imposed by the author or illustrator. Ryan and Hermann-Wilmarth acknowledged that the gender
or sexuality of a text could not be altered, but rather examined for its complexity. In this study,
queer theory was used to examine the fluidity of gender and sexuality while using a critical
literacy approach to foster analytical discussions about the purpose and intent of the author.
Additionally, queer theory was used to “queer” or alter perceptions related to gender and
sexuality through talking about commonly-held binaries and promoting the importance of
sexuality and gender diversity in children’s books.
These conceptual frameworks not only aligned with a critical literacy approach in
examining the literature, but also supported my role as the researcher serving as the teacher.
Used in tandem, critical literacy and queer theory permitted me to focus on disrupting the
everyday heteronormative practices, by analyzing children’s literature, as a means to investigate
the social and equity issues surrounding sexuality and gender in society (Comber, 2005). In sum,
this study relied equally on critical literacy and queer theory to examine the responses of young
children’s participation in a read loud of LGBTQ-themed texts.
Knowledge Gained from Pilot Study
The findings noted in the limited but similar research studies along with the results from
my pilot study (Bridgman, 2012) shaped the analysis of the data for this study. In my pilot study,
five preschoolers’ responses to LGBTQ-themed children’s literature were investigated to better
understand how topics of sexuality and gender could be addressed in the classroom. Critical
literacy theory and queer theory served as the theoretical frameworks. Two findings on how to
address topics of sexuality and gender with young children were revealed in the pilot study. The
first finding outlined that teachers should explicitly confront heteronormativity through various
pedagogical practices: (1) questioning and responding to literature, (2) being empathetic; and (3)

12

modeling acceptance toward multiple views. The second finding demonstrated the various ways
in which the preschoolers served as active agents reserving their viewpoints toward sexuality and
gender by: (1) expressing their awareness and acceptance towards LGBTQ representations, (2)
resisting or redirecting such representations, or (3) consenting with the perspective of another.
Overall, the data suggested that learning about diverse sexual representations and gender
occurred during those times in which, I, as the researcher-teacher, purposely included nonheteronormative topics in the classroom.
This current study is different from my pilot study in that my pilot study examined the
participant responses as one group, whereas this current study included an in-depth analysis of
the individual perspectives of three participants. This current study closely examined the
responses of three participants by devoting individual case studies to each student participant as
well as includes data about the role I assumed as both the researcher and teacher. Additionally,
the participants in my pilot study demonstrated their perspectives to sexuality and gender in
general. This current study provides an additional layer of examining student responses
according to Hagood’s (2002) views of how critical literacy should encompass both production
of identity and construction of subjectivity approaches. Lastly, this study presents information
about the tensions, struggles, and uncomfortableness I encountered by critically reading and
discussing sexuality and gender with the younger participants.
Analyzing how students older than preschool age responded to critical readings about
sexuality and gender provided meaningful additional data about this topic. For instance, the
children in this study were at least 5 years of age. The starting age range was selected for two
reasons. First, this age range was not observed in my pilot study. Second, young elementary
participants provided more in-depth responses as their language and vocabulary were stronger

13

than that of a preschool student. Leaper and Smith (2004), developmental psychology
researchers, noted in their meta-analytic review of gender variations in children’s language use,
that gender is a concrete aspect for young children versus older children. Children over the age
of five are less rigid and consequently are more flexible in their attitudes about gender. In
regards to language ability, older children demonstrate better language skills moving from oneword utterances to complex grammatical sentence (Brown, 1973).
Definitions of Key Terms
Critical Literacy
Critical literacy was used in this study as a way of framing the practice of critically
reading a text. Vasquez (2010) argues that critical literacy should “look, feel, and sound
different, and it should accomplish different sorts of life work depending on the context in which
it is being used as a perspective for teaching and learning” (p. 2). Vasquez resists defining
critical literacy, since it can vary according to the context and purpose of the readings. The
premise of critical literacy includes teaching that texts are not neutral and that each text provides
an ideological message about the world through its words and illustrations. Such text analysis
includes examining the missing voices and the dynamics between language and power in relation
to social issues, such as race, class, sexuality, and gender and one’s overall identity (Janks,
1993). This study equally supports the recommendation of Hagood (2002) to consider both
perspectives of critical literacy: production of identity and the construction of subjectivity.
Hagood notes that critical literacy rooted merely in identity or subjectivity could be problematic
and therefore both production of identity and construction of subjectivity should occur. Critical
literacy which focuses primarily on production of identity invites the reader to identity with the
proposed identities in the book. The possible problem with this approach is that the reader views

14

these proposed identities as the only viable options in society. Often the representations in
children’s books tend to be heteronormative as well as uphold stereotypical beliefs (Hagood,
2002; Oliver & Lalik, 2000; Young, 2000). Critical literacy which focuses primarily on
construction of subjectivity assumes that the reader will struggle to accept or even resist
representations offered texts as a way to construct their own identity. The possible problem with
this approach is that the reader is already positioned in a place which assumes that he or she will
resist the proposed representations (Hagood, 2002). Critical literacy should welcome both
production of identity and construction of subjectivity reader responses as a way to empower the
student to construct her or his individual identity.In short, applying the tenets of critical literacy
in this study consisted of (a) focusing on power that encouraged reflection, transformation, or
action (b) concentrating on the issue and its complexity (c) employing adaptable pedagogical
techniques according to the context and perspectives of students, and (d) analyzing multiple
viewpoints of critical literacy, such as production of identity and construction of subjectivity
(Vasquez, 2010; Quintero, 2009; DeVoogd, 2004; Hagood, 2002).
Construction of Subjectivity in relation to Critical Literacy
The construction of subjectivity places the reader as the main subject who struggles to
accept or may even resist representations offered in texts in an effort to construct their own
identity (Hagood, 2002; Fuery, 1995). By pushing back from the offered representations the
reader commences a process by which s/he constructs his or her subjectivity to be unlike the
representations offered in the texts. The overall meaning of the text, in this sense, does not reside
in the text but how the reader struggles with or rejects the proposed text.

15

Production of Identity in relation to Critical Literacy
The production of identity, in contrast to the construction of subjectivity, serves as a
stable representation in that it relates to categorical understandings which are formed over time
(Hagood, 2002). Examples of such categories are nationality, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, or any
other identity-producing method used to organize people into groups. The overall purpose of the
text, in this sense, is to recruit readers to align to the imposed categories (Hagood, 2002). The
concern with this approach is that the proposed identities in most texts are normative,
stereotypical, and serve to perpetuate the status quo by inviting the reader to identify, as in the
case of this study, with heteronormative representations.
Critical Readings
Critical readings are defined as analyzing, discussing, and comparing the representations
presented in children’s literature as well as in media, such as films or television series. Overall, a
critical reading approach is guided by the premise that texts are neither neutral nor apolitical
artifacts; rather every text promotes a message through its words and illustrations (Ryan &
Hermann-Wilmarth, 2013). A critical literacy theoretical framework guided the study and was
enacted through approaches similar to critical pedagogical practices, except that the focus of the
study remained on children’s literature or media.
LGBTQ
LGBTQ is an acronym for people who identify as lesbian, gay, bi-sexual, transgender or
queer. In this study queer is also a term which breaks the heteronormative assumptions of what is
considered normal and expected; it also encompasses other alternative identities such as intersex
or people questioning their sexuality or gender expression.

16

Heteronormativity
Heteronormativity is a concept that describes how social institutions and policies
emphasize the notion that sexual relationships only exist between males and females and thus are
the only viable option; this term refers to the interlocking system that includes both sexuality and
gender (Ryan, 2010). In this study, heteronormativity refers to the assumptions and expectations
that govern both sexuality and gender in society.
Heterosexism
Heterosexism is an ideology which asserts that heterosexuals have privileges based
primarily on their sexuality. For example, heterosexual people do not face unfair employment
discrimination based solely on their sexual orientation (Queen, Farrel, & Gupta, 2005). Recently
Vocativ (2015) noted that homosexuals can still be fired in 32 states based solely on their sexual
orientation. In this study, heterosexism includes the prejudice and discrimination that
transgender, queer, or those who defy gender norms (e.g., a male wearing a dress) experience for
not adhering to the traditional roles of heterosexuals.
Homophobia
In general, homophobia refers to the fear and hatred of homosexuals. Homophobia can
equally include the discomfort and dislike that people have towards LGBTQ people and can lead
to misunderstandings about LGBTQ people as well as affect discriminatory practices toward
LGBTQ people (Fakhrid-Deen, 2010).
Queer
Queer has multiple meanings. In this study, queer refers to anyone who defies traditional
sexual and gender norms (Queen, Farrel, & Gupta, 2005) as well as how a concept or object (i.e.,
children’s books) can be altered (e.g. “queered”) to be more inclusive of those who fall outside

17

of the heterosexual and gender norms (Ryan, Patraw & Bednar, 2013). For this reason, the
definition of queer supports the practice of reading LGBTQ-themed children’s books aloud and
of representing non-heterosexual practices in a quotidian manner as a way of deconstructing or
possibly rejecting the formation of binaries regarding sexuality and gender.
Significance and Rationale for Study
Most children’s literature used in classrooms support a heteronormative perspective of
society (Rowell, 2007). Offering such limited perspectives within the school context supports a
type of hidden curriculum reduces positive representations about diverse sexuality and gender
(Sears, 1991). Additionally, it ensures that schools remain complicit to discrimination by failing
to be proactive toward homophobia (Blackburn & Clark, 2011). Although some early childhood
researchers and literacy scholars support introducing topics of sexuality and gender at the
elementary level or younger (Blaise, 2009; Blackburn & Clark, 2011; Davies, 2003; DePalma &
Atkinson, 2009, Hall, 2008; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007; Rice, 2002, Rowell, 2007; Letts & Sears,
1999, Schall & Kauffman, 2003), very few research studies focus directly on the use of LGBTQthemed children’s literature with K-4 students (Hall, 2008; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007, 2010;
Souto-Manning & Hermann-Wilmarth, 2008). Critical literacy employs a problem-posing
approach which involves the reader moving from reflection to action and is generally rooted in
social justice initiatives (Janks, 1993; Quintero, 2009). Inducing social action however requires
that first; society better understands the connection between language and power (Janks, 1993)
and second, accepts this new level of awareness by igniting a movement toward change. This
study was significant in that it invites educators to consider exploring subjectivity by questioning
the normative practice and ideologies portrayed in text through literacy conversations and thus
support equity and social justice with elementary students.

18

Documenting an examination of LGBTQ topics through critical literacy is pertinent for
contributing to the fields of knowledge about young children’s understanding of sexuality and
gender, children’s ability to critically examine texts, and the ways in which sexuality and gender
diversity could be taught appropriately and effectively at the elementary level. Teachers and
teacher educators should reflect on the significance of each component as well as consider how
the components are interrelated. In other words, what are the best ways to interrogate critical
literacy within the classroom as well as discuss the topic of sexuality and gender with young
children? By examining these processes, we seek to better understand how the role of education
can reproduce or challenge unequal power structures in society, as well as reflect on our part in
the overall process.
Rationale for Literacy Researchers and Teacher Educators
Although studies exist that document students engaging with LGBTQ topics at the
secondary level and higher (Blackburn & Clark, 2011; Clare & James, 2005; Macgillivray &
Jennings, 2008;), few studies focus on elementary students expanding their knowledge of
sexuality and gender through reading LGBTQ-themed children’s literature (Hall, 2008;
Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007; 2010; Ryan, Patraw, & Bednar, 2013; Souto-Manning & HermannWilmarth, 2008). Scholars have called for continued research to inform educators about the
various ways children construct knowledge concerning sexuality and gender and how their
knowledge may play in the classroom as well as be expanded through literacy (Crisp & Hiller,
2011; Davies, 2003; Hall, 2008; Hanlon, 2009; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007; Rice, 2002, Schall &
Kauffman, 2003). In order for teachers to consider embracing LGBTQ representations or
including LGBTQ texts within the classroom and to feel successful in doing so, more scholarship

19

is needed which demonstrates real life experiences of what happens when a teacher and students
discuss sexuality and gender.
Additionally, teachers would benefit from having more knowledge about LGBTQthemed texts as well as a tool box of strategies for integrating these texts into the classroom. In
an article about teaching gender diversity and transgender experiences at the elementary level,
Ryan, Patraw and Bednar (2013) assert that remaining silent ultimately hurts children more. A
lack of scholarship focused on exploring topics of sexuality and gender with elementary students,
in addition to rendering gay and lesbian issues from teacher education programs invisible, leaves
teachers ill-equipped to address the needs of students in their classroom (Souto-Manning &
Hermann-Wilmarth, 2011). Teacher education programs concerned with social justice issues
must aim to provide students with experiences and activities as a way to explore how we are all
cultural beings. The present study addressed this call for research by documenting actual
experiences of both the teacher and students using LGBTQ-texts within the context of a learning
environment through critical readings.
Rationale for Elementary Teachers
A critical literacy application of reading LGBTQ-themed texts provides a means with
which teachers might work more effectively to address the diversity of their classrooms.
Examining LGBTQ-themed texts could be a valuable method for challenging children to analyze
and empathize with those absent within the majority of children and classroom texts. By reading
LGBTQ-themed books, the teacher demonstrates her or his willingness to discuss sexuality and
gender through inviting perspectives and asking questions focused on such topics. Including
LGBTQ-themed children’s books and providing a safe space for discussions to occur is pivotal

20

in the process of viewing the world critically and to learn about sexuality and gender in ways
applicable to the everyday world.
This study inspires to provide teachers with a lens to analyze the implementation of
critical literacy by means of reading the vignettes taken from transcripts during the actual
readings. By doing so, teachers are able to better understand what critical literacy might look like
in the classroom and more importantly how to use critical literacy to explore topics related to
sexuality and gender. This study both encourages teachers to become familiar with children’s
literature featuring characters and explains how to integrate these texts and topics in the
classroom thus making the classroom more inclusive for LGBTQ individuals or children who
have LGBTQ family members.
Classroom Literacy Rationale: Social Justice Initiatives
By examining topics related to sexuality and gender through the lenses of critical literacy
and queer theory, this study demonstrates the ways in which schools can assist students in
exploring subjectivity by questioning the normative practices and ideologies portrayed in texts
which can create or maintain stereotypes (Hagood, 2002). Given the selective views of the
world through classroom texts, critical literacy is a necessary aspect of literacy instruction to
teach children how the texts to which they are exposed play into their understanding of
themselves and their place in the world (Moje, Young, Readence & Moore, 2000). Critical
literacy rooted in critical social theories focuses on effecting change as a way to create a more
socially just and equitable society by understanding the power dynamics between language,
literacy and personal meaning (Hagood, 2002; Lankshear & McLaren, 1993). Applying the
tenets of critical literacy is paramount in creating literacy environments which render readers as
active questioners who view “reading the word” and “reading the world” (Freire & Macedo,

21

1987). This study provides an occasion to consider how critical literacy learning not only focuses
on students recognizing the tensions between the word and the world, but also empowers
students to transform reality by envisioning their own renditions aligned to their beliefs and in
their own words.
Summary
This dissertation presents collective case studies documenting the application of critical
literacy intertwined with queer theory to demonstrate how the elementary curriculum might
support sexuality and gender diversity in the classroom. Guided by the research questions, I
focused on three students and my role as their teacher. I observed how the children responded to
LGBTQ representations within children’s texts and to topics of sexuality and gender in general. I
analyzed the children’s willingness and ability to apply critical literacy to texts inside and outside
of the classroom.
Additionally, I examined my position and capacity to work with and on theory by
queering the classroom environment, allowing sexuality and gender to remain fluid constructs,
and disrupting the everyday heteronormative practices portrayed in texts and in the classroom.
Findings point to a number of considerations about both the student participants and my
role as their teacher. These findings provide both teachers and teacher educators with asset-based
ways of knowing and understanding how to render schools a more socially just place for all
students, including those who know or identify as LGBTQ.
Overall, these findings challenge schools and teachers to reflect on how the dominant and
deficit narratives of the classroom characterize LGBTQ individuals and their families as nonmainstream or render them invisible from society by and large.

22

Chapter 2
Relevant Literature and Conceptual Frameworks
This chapter provides an overview of the relevant literature concerning the topic of
sexuality and gender with children as well as the lack of LGBTQ-themed literature in the
classroom and overall. This chapter highlights the existing scholarship and examines how this
study compares to and contrasts with emerging themes in similar studies. Two conceptual
frameworks, critical literacy and queer theory, are also discussed in depth. An analysis of how
critical literacy and queer theory might appear to be contradictory frameworks is addressed
followed with a discussion on how such frameworks equally offer benefits in interpreting the
data.
Relevant Literature
Discussing Sexuality and Gender with Children
The majority of elementary students has a basic understanding of sexuality and gender
and is familiar with the words “gay” and “lesbian” (Soloman, 2004; Schall & Kauffmann, 2003).
Children construct ideas about sexuality and gender, including myths and misconceptions,
through media, friends, or family (Soloman, 2004). Elementary students express various
perceptions about sexuality and gender. For instance, one first grader wrote: “I don’t think that
stuff is for kids” (Soloman, 2004, p. 104), while another third grader shared, “my anty [sic] is a
lesbin [sic]” (p.104). Not discussing topics related to sexuality and gender with children
effectively puts them at greater risk for becoming bullies or being bullied themselves, as well as
being unable to develop appropriate coping defenses when faced with opposing views (Sears,
2009). The notion that adults are “protecting” children through silence is more of a reflection of

23

the adults’ uneasiness around sexuality and gender than it is a concern for children’s inability to
comprehend such topics (Sears, 2009).
Many teachers fail to see the connection between creating environments free from
harassment, homophobia, and discrimination to the significance of discussing such topics with
young children (Wolfe, 2006). Interrogating beliefs and attitudes is pertinent with young children
as name-calling and ridicule often begins in elementary school (Swartz, 2003). Although
teachers admit to controlling what is acceptable in terms of bullying and teasing, they have often
not considered how their views of LGBTQ individuals can influence the safety of LGBTQ
students or those raised by LGBTQ family members (Bower & Klecka, 2009). Bower and
Klecka (2009) found that teachers neglected to identify how lessons targeting diversity and
acceptance connected to the prevention of bullying and teasing.
The silence, fear, and taboo around LGBTQ representations can cause dangerous
consequences for students as they advance into the higher grades (Burt et al., 2010). For
instance, Kosciw and Diaz (2008) found that 42% of students reported being verbally harassed in
school due to their parents’ sexual orientation, and over a third (37%) of students admitted to
being verbally harassed due to their own or perceived sexual orientation. Children raised by
LGBTQ families experienced higher levels of anguish at school, which was based not on the
family difference, but rather the teacher’s assumption that every child had a mother and father
(Kosciw & Diaz, 2008).
Additionally, over half of LGBTQ parents felt excluded from the school community by
means of the school not including LGBTQ-themed books or not being permitted to participate in
school activities or events (Kosciw & Diaz, 2008). Nearly half of the children raised in an
LGBTQ household report being verbally abused by other classmates because of their parents’

24

sexual orientation. Discounting LGBTQ families in schools invalidates children in that it hinders
the connection the child feels with the parent (Burt et al, 2010). Teachers might want to consider
the student’s perspective when books, posters, music, and so forth used in the classroom are
representative of a group to which he/she does not belong (Fox, 2007). Overall, integrating
LGBTQ topics in the classroom is a matter of recognizing the different types of family
relationships, love, and structures (Wolfe, 2006).
LGBTQ-themed Literature in the Classroom
Literacy may either deny or permit students to imagine, to describe, and to narrate
themselves into existence (Banks, 2009), if used appropriately, critical literacy should offer an
ideal image of the world and allow students to visualize their lives in relation to the literature by
either connecting to the text or by critically examining the underrepresented (Vasquez 2004,
Vicars, 2009). Requiring students to read texts which valorize one type of sexuality over others
or assume the role of a heterosexual character unwittingly endorses an “unchangeable binary:
You are either Romeo or Juliet, a boy attracted to a girl or a girl attracted to a boy” (Blackburn &
Smith, 2010, p. 627). Conversely, as Whelan (2006) documents, one lesbian student read every
LGBTQ-themed book in the school library in order to validate her existence through the
literature. In this example, LGBTQ-themed books provided this student with a type of stability
and assurance by connecting her life experiences to the stories of other LGBTQ individuals.
One primary purpose of classroom literature is to legitimize the lived experiences of
students in the classroom (Crisp, 2009; Rowell, 2007; Smolkin & Young, 2011, Schneider,
2001). That said, children should also have access to books that reflect their lives outside of the
classroom (Smolkin & Young, 2011). Diversity within the literature validates the lives of
children reflected in the literature, while simultaneously exposing children to various

25

perspectives unlike their own. Few elementary classrooms, however, include LGBTQ
representations (Smolkin & Young, 2011; Schneider, 2001). Including LGBTQ-themed materials
can be instrumental in shaping the self-esteem of a child, particularly those who are queer or
have LGBTQ family members (Burt et al., 2010). LGBTQ-themed books deserve equal
recognition, particularly if schools incorporate books with people of color, people who have
disabilities, and people who speak different languages (Fox, 2007). Schneider (2001) observed
that while elementary teachers did not forbid students from writing about LGBT topics in the
classroom, such student-produced work became censored by means of not allowing the student
to share the work or forbidding the student to read it aloud in class. When the classroom
literature environment does not authenticate the lives of students, students wrestle to answer
questions such as: “Where do I belong?” and “How do I fit in?” (Vicars, 2009, p. 316).
In surveying high schools mostly in the Midwest, Blackburn and Buckley (2005)
discovered that only 18 out of 212 schools (approximately 8.49%) incorporated LGBTQ
representations in the English language arts curriculum. Similarly, Thein, Kavanagh, and Fink
(2013) found that although K-12 language arts teachers expressed sympathy for LGBTQ
concerns, the majority (76%) would not incorporate LGBTQ literature into the classroom.
Teachers’ responses regarding their uneasiness to incorporate LGBTQ literature in the classroom
varied from: “It’s not my job, others will protest, it will cause more harm than good, to, I don’t
know how” (Thein et al., 2013).
The ways in which the school literacy environment is constructed teaches students not
only what counts as literacy and bolsters certain ideologies (Moita-Lopes, 2006), but also
influences how a student positions himself or herself within the educational context (Gee, 2005).
A student is likely to position herself or himself based on the school literacy environment. A

26

school literacy environment that offers only heteronormative representations positions all others
as invisible from both the text and within the classroom. For example, Vetter (2010) studied a
LGBTQ student who deemed her sexuality as an inappropriate topic in the classroom, a
positionality that consequently caused her to censor words or expressions in support of diverse
types of sexuality. Students become skilled in academically and socially navigating their position
between the expectations of the class to their individual sense of sexuality and gender (MoitaLopes, 2006). In this sense, the literacy environment in the classroom could potentially provide a
place for students to align with or deviate from the discourses available in the literacy
environment.
Recognizing the heteronormative representations commonly embedded in many
children’s books highlights how the concepts of sexuality and gender are taught in schools
(Davies, 2003). Heteronormativity, in this study, refers to the interlocking system between
sexuality and gender which is socially constructed to emphasize that sexual relationships
between males and females are the only viable and acceptable option (Davies, 2003; Jackson,
2006; Thorne and Luria, 1986). This interlocking system between sexuality and gender remains
consequential, as there is no consensus on what either term means due to the various social
dimensions in society (Jackson, 2006).
Thorne and Luria (1986) found that the arrangement of children according to their gender
(i.e., boys lining up versus girls lining up) provides a foundation for how boys and girls interact
with each other in the later years. Heterosexual teasing and rituals such as “chase and kiss”
increase gender boundaries and promote heteronormativity (Thorne & Luria, 1986).
Offering multiple gender discourses of femininity and masculinity is essential to
subverting and deconstructing the definitions of what it means to be a girl or a boy (Blaise,

27

2005). Blaise (2009, 2010) found that young children are not only interested in exploring gender,
but also hold certain viewpoints regarding sexuality. For instance, in observing typical early
childhood activities (e.g., reading, drawing, talking), one child participant examining a picture of
two kissing crocodiles stated, “they are being sexy,” prompting another child participant to
assume that “one is a boy and one is a girl” (Blaise, 2010, p. 7) thus supporting the viewpoint
that sexuality and gender are concepts which children learn about congruently.
Heteronormative gender representations in children’s books solidify children’s
perceptions on how males and females should act (Crisp & Hiller, 2011; Korenhaus & Demarest,
1993). Equally, children exposed to nontraditional books with non-normative representations
were likely to consider other depictions (e.g., two moms, a transgender sibling) as foreign, weird,
or atypical. Expanding students’ views toward gender and sexuality requires more than simply
having LGBTQ-themed books in the classroom. Davies (1989) and Rice (2002) demonstrated
that offering nontraditional children’s books (e.g., books portraying diverse gender roles) was
not sufficient for broadening students’ definitions of masculinity and femininity. To expand the
children’s definitions of masculinity and femininity, Rice (2002) relied on transmediation,
defined as examining the same topic across different mediums (e.g., reading, discussion,
writing), while reading nontraditional children’s books to third graders. Similar to Blaise (2005),
Rice found that the classroom discussions were pivotal for expanding students’ current gender
understandings.
Like Rice (2002), Schall and Kauffmann (2003) also used LGBTQ-themed children’s
books to approach the topics of gender and sexuality within a class of fourth and fifth graders.
Schall and Kauffman found that most students did not view homosexuality as immoral, just
different, and empathized with people who experienced prejudice and discrimination. One

28

participant, for instance, shared, “It’s kind of like the same thing as a girl and a boy liking each
other but it’s boy and boy” (p. 40). Participants sought to better understand diverse relationships
and questioned the lack of LGBTQ representations in classrooms.
Ryan, Patraw, and Bednar (2013) examined how an elementary teacher fostered literary
discussions around transgender and gender non-conforming people (i.e., people who do not
conform to the traditional gender roles) through reading children’s literature. Four instructional
episodes consisting of “thematically connected lessons around a text or group of texts in which
gender diversity was a central component” (Ryan, et al., 2013, p. 90) were conducted to illustrate
how these topics could be integrated into an elementary classroom. One episode, “Beginning
Discussions of Unwritten Gender Rules,” encouraged third-graders to examine gender
expectations in society. Lessons focused on bullying, examining a gay character in literature, to
discussing the complexities of gender expression and transgender people/experiences. One
essential finding documented by Ryan et al. (2013) included the participants’ willingness to
discuss these topics and seek out additional knowledge about diverse gender identities and
expressions.
The relevant scholarship discussed above highlights three important areas. First,
including non-traditional children’s books is not sufficient in expanding children’s views about
sexuality or gender. Second, classroom conversations are essential for discussing the prolific
heteronormative representations of sexuality and gender offered in most books. Third, gender
and sexuality are interrelated concepts that children construct congruently; therefore, asking
children to examine what it means to be a boy or girl and how such representations are depicted
in books could likely broaden their perceptions about both sexuality and gender. For instance,
inviting students to examine both the gender and sexuality expectations of a princess allows

29

students to first examine how society expects a princess to dress and second, how society expects
her to marry a prince.
This Study in Relation to Findings in the Relevant Literature
Taking into account the relevant scholarship as well as the findings from my pilot study
(Bridgman, 2012), this study examined students’ responses as a way to imagine what a
curriculum might look like when it includes critical readings of LGBTQ-themed children’s
books with elementary students. In contrast to previous research, this study used both critical
literacy and queer theory to analyze the data and provide rich descriptions of multiple students
and the researcher taking on the role of teacher to examine the dynamics of classroom
conversations when diverse sexuality and gender topics occur. This study documented in-depth
responses of three focal participants as well as data from the researcher acting as teacher through
a collective case study analysis (Barone, 2011). In light of the current scholarship, the next
section compares and contrasts the focus of my study with the emerging themes found in similar
studies (Ryan et al., 2013; Vasquez, 2004; Davies, 2003; Schall & Kauffmann 2003; Dutro
2001).
First, Schall and Kauffmann (2003) documented that most children questioned why
topics of sexuality and gender were not part of the classroom curriculum after openly discussing
these topics. They noted that children expressed interest and sought additional knowledge about
sexuality and gender particularly when linked to understanding their own existence and those
around them. Second, Davies (2003) found that children as young as four and five struggled to
make sense of gender. Davies’ finding not only supports the need to invite children to converse
in such topics to lessen their struggle, but also supports Schall and Kauffmann’s finding in that
students will have to struggle independently in order to make sense of these eliminated topics in

30

the classroom. Dutro (2001) witnessed this similar struggle in a study in which she observed how
young children selected books to read based on gender. For instance, girls and boys made
generalizations about what the other should read by stating: “girls like…” or “boys won’t
read…” (Dutro, 2001, 383). Dutro demonstrated how young children not only work to
understand what being a boy or girl entails in their own world, but also how this knowledge
applies to their identity as readers. These findings spotlight children exploring how gender and
sexuality fit into their lived experiences both as students in the classroom as well as independent
readers.
In order to evaluate similarities and differences across the scholarship, my study focused
on young participants discussing topics related to sexuality and gender. First, like Schall and
Kauffman (2003), I examined whether young children posed similar inquiries about the absence
of sexuality and gender topics in the classroom. Second, like Davies (2003) and Dutro (2001), I
considered whether participants demonstrated similar struggles by asking questions or appearing
confused about gender and sexuality and how, if any, such topics influenced their identity as
readers. Thirdly, and similar to Ryan et al. (2013), this study used a critical lens to demonstrate
injustices towards diverse forms of sexuality and gender.
In contrast to the studies above, and to Ryan et al. (2013), my study conducted critical
readings of LGBTQ-themed books as a way of not only analyzing the purpose or message of the
author, but also to compare and contrast the readings to non-LGBTQ-themed books. Lastly,
through the implementation of critical literacy, which also differs from the studies above, I
analyzed data for in-depth descriptions in order to provide each participant’s responses about
sexuality and gender. Additionally, this study includes examples of critical literacy in action for
each participant. Overall, my study builds on previous research and goes beyond it to add to the

31

scholarship in the field by offering a unique perspective about both the importance of
implementing LGBTQ-literature as well as the importance of using critical literacy in the pursuit
of inciting social justice in the classroom.
Conceptual Frameworks
This section provides a discussion regarding the conceptual frameworks used in this
study: Critical Literacy and Queer Theory. Both are discussed in-depth relative to their
appropriateness for analyzing the data and thus for answering the research questions:
1. How do young children respond to LGBTQ representations within children’s texts and to
the topic of sexuality and gender in general via critical literacy?
2. How is critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender enacted by the researcher
assuming the role as teacher?
Critical Literacy
Critical Literacy: Overview
In this study, I used critical literacy as a way to frame the practice of critically reading a
text. Critical literacy involved looking at and comparing texts in order to pinpoint the
expectations in society surrounding sexuality and gender. Such analysis provided the students a
way to better understand the connection between language and power by understanding the
dominant discourses present in texts (Janks, 1993). Through investigating the missing voices of
texts, critical literacy supported examining social issues such as race, class, sexuality and gender
(Comber, 2013, 2001).
In order to construct a space for critical literacy to occur with children, I relied on the
work of Vasquez (2010). Vasquez’s work is aligned to this study in that it demonstrates how to
use critical literacy to connect what happens in and out of the classroom with young children.

32

Vasquez’s book Getting beyond “I like the book”: Creating space for critical literary in K-6
classrooms (2010) permitted me to examine how other elementary teachers applied the theory of
critical literacy to children’s books. For instance, Vasquez provided several vignettes of
elementary teachers enacting the theory of critical literacy with children’s literature as a way to
discuss social issues. In one vignette with kindergartners, Vasquez shared how young children
discovered the discrepancies between portraying men and women equally while analyzing a
poster and a book about Canadian Police Officers. One student stated: “There’s no girls. There’s
not girls in it” (24). By applying the theory of critical literacy to this type of text, the students
reflected on how both females and males were socially-constructed and how males were viewed
in a position of power. Children continued to discuss how these representations were inaccurate.
One girl problematized the absence of females by stating that since girls ride horses, the
portrayal is not accurate without the representation of females.
Additionally, the teacher’s role was paramount in providing children with the necessary
language to analytically discuss complex issues by modeling it. In general, Vasquez concluded
that the result of enacting the theory of critical literacy should involve the teacher and students
collectively working to expand their knowledge around social and equity issues by means of
examining the representations in texts alongside those represented in the day-to-day world.
Critical literacy is an important aspect of literacy instruction which teaches students the
importance of interrogating texts as a means to construct their understandings in relation to
themselves and to the world (Moje, Young, Readance & Moore, 2000). Given that the works of
social theorists such as Freire (1970/2000) and Althusser (2001) have influenced educators’
understanding of critical literacy, the application of critical literacy can differ depending on how
teachers define the role of critical literacy. Critical literacy enables educators an “opportunity to

33

use language in powerful ways to get things done in the world” (Comber, 2001, p.1), such as
expanding children’s views about gender and sexuality.
In this study, critical literacy remains grounded in Freire’s (1970/2000) concept of
libertory education in that Freire views liberation as a praxis which involves reflection followed
by action about society in order to transform it. Educators “truly committed to liberation must
reject the banking concept…and replace it with the posing of the problems of men [sic] in their
relations with the world” (Freire, 1970/2000, p. 63). Freire considered any situation in which
students did not participate in the inquiry process as an act of violence and domination. This
notion of liberatory education, inviting students to participate in the inquiry process, allowed me
to analyze how the participants responded to LGBTQ-themed texts through critical literacy.
Stitzlein (2007) has demonstrated why gender and sexuality are best suited for exploring
under a critical lens, particularly in the elementary classroom. According to Stitzlein, children
who appear to traverse societal gender expectations with such ease that they blur the distinctions
of what it means to be a boy or a girl are gender crossers. For example, Stitzlein remarked how a
four-year-old boy assumed the role of “mother” during playtime to such a degree that the child’s
gender unmistakably personified a female. Like other scholars, Stitzlein highlighted how gender
and sexuality are connected constructs and that by crossing the gender construct, a person may
inadvertently involve crossing the sexuality construct or vice versa. In other words, classifying
an individual based solely on their attire and demeanor leads to defining what type of attraction
the person may eventually have toward others. For this reason, critical literacy with a focus on
gender and sexuality can allow all children, including gender crossers, to examine how gender
and in turn sexuality are socially constructed as well as explore how to problematize these
classifications.

34

Quintero (2009) argued that by enacting critical literacy in the classroom, students are
exposed to powerful lessons through examining their lived experiences in conjunction with the
new information. Critical literacy thus fosters a natural development from reflection to action. In
this way, this type of movement from reflection to action resembles Freire’s (1970/2000) notion
of liberatory education. Quintero (2009) breaks down the critical method by viewing it as a
problem-posing approach in that critical literacy encourages students to experience and make
conscious the transformation that occurs from reading and reflecting about the literature.
For instance, while reading a children’s book about Native Americans, a group of students
discovered that the illustrations of the Native American characters in the book were not accurate.
As a result, children discussed the importance of becoming critical readers in order to locate the
correct information about Native Americans.
In sum, the tenets of critical literacy theory applicable to this study included: (a) focusing
on power that encouraged reflection, transformation, or action; (b) focusing on the problems and
its complexities; (c) using dynamic and adaptable techniques according to the context and the
perspectives of the students; and (d) examining multiple perspectives both in relation to critical
literacy, such as production of identity and construction of subjectivity (Vasquez, 2010;
Quintero, 2009; McLaughlin & DeVoogd, 2004; Hagood 2002). Becoming a critically literate
reader requires participants to problematize issues dealing with power and equality as well as
examining the silencing and nonexistence of voices represented in texts. Critical literacy, in this
study, mirrored the notion of liberatory education by means of implementing a literacy practice.
Doing so involved inviting participants to examine the dominant discourses by reflecting about
the use and regulation of language in conventional ways in children’s books, television

35

programs, and other media, and within social institutions, as well as to consider the ways
language works to define a particular culture (Janks, 2010).
Critical Literacy: Production of Identity and Construction of Subjectivity
Hagood (2002) recognizes the challenges teachers may face when using critical literacy.
Some teachers may consider critical literacy better suited for focusing on identity issues if they
feel that the reader seeks reflection in the literature, while other teachers may view critical
literacy as a means for the reader to examine more deeply the construction of her or his
subjectivity in relation to the text. In other words, some teachers may invite students to read
about a heroic individual who overcame several life obstacles as a means to invite other students
in the class to replicate this proposed representation. The problem with focusing merely on
production of identity is that it assumes that the reader will identify with the proposed
representation.
Conversely, teachers who prefer to use critical literacy with a focus on construction of
subjectivity may invite students to read about a complex individual who commits several
wrongdoings as a means to invite students to push back or not align to the proposed identity and
thus create their own identity in opposition. The problem with focusing merely on construction
of subjectivity is that it equally assumes that the reader will resist or not align to the proposed
representation.
For that reason, Hagood, asserts that both approaches should be equally supported in the
classroom: when critical literacy “looks at either identity production destined only for reader
consumption or… [the] active subject construction….each [is] an important aspect… [but] alone
seems inadequate and problematic…” (Hagood, 2002, p. 259). Hagood thus calls our attention to
the insufficiency of framing critical literacy either solely as the study of identity or, contrastively,

36

as merely subjectivity. These stances are problematic in that they deny readers the opportunity to
analyze literature from both perspectives. Critical literacy grounded in both the production of
identity as well as the construction of subjectivity offers readers the opportunity to pinpoint the
complexities and symbolism based on the construction of identities in texts. In other words,
critical literacy allows readers to discover new textual representations in which they may recreate
or replicate similar identities, while simultaneously encouraging them to reject such textual
representations in order to construct identities suited to their own identity production. For this
reason, this study considered both aspects of critical literacy by examining how the participants
used the texts as a way to align with the proposed identities as well as how they construct
subjectivity by pushing against the categorical identities represented in the texts.
Identity Production. Identity, when viewed as a stable and fixed categorical marker,
serves to classify people according to the definitions constructed by social institutions
(Althusser, 2001; Troyna & Vincent, 1995). For instance, categories such as nationality, gender,
race, ethnicity, and sexuality not only arrange people according to certain categories, but also
offer ways for all individuals to cognitively organize other people according to these categories.
In turn, this type of classification works to stabilize notions about identity (Hagood, 2002).
In applying categorical markers to the participants in my study, the participants assumed
the identity of elementary student as well as the identity of young child. Considering these
particular identity markers was essential in that both placed the participants in an inferior place
relative to: student and child. Additionally, according to this dynamic, the teacher and adult
would necessarily possess more knowledge.
Some researchers, however, consider the notion of identity to be much more fluid and
changeable according to the context (Gee, 2000). While certain identities may be viewed as fixed

37

and socially defined, such as nationality, race, and sexuality, the degree to which they influence
our lived experiences in the world varies according to the context. For instance an AfricanAmerican student attending a diverse school may feel differently about her ethnicity than an
African-American student who attends a predominately white school.
Critical literacy, with a focus on identity, concentrates on the message of the text and the
reader who reads the text as means of understanding that the representations, or in a sense
proposed identities in the text, are viable options in society (Hagood, 2002). The central critical
concern in applying this type of critical literacy is that many representations in texts are
normative, stable, or otherwise stereotypical, thus exposing students to dominant identities that
perpetuate hegemonic beliefs and uphold the status quo (Oliver & Lalik, 2000; Young, 2000).
Considering that diverse sexuality and gender representations are absent from many elementary
classrooms, children raised by LGBTQ parents or those who identify as queer struggle to
position themselves in relation to the mother and father images depicted in the classroom
literature (Gilmore & Bell, 2006). With that in mind, critical literacy with a focus on identity
should not only present multiple realities of the world and thus multiple identities, but also
encourage students to consider their identity in relation to the representations given in the text.
In attending to the production of identity, critical literacy works to invite students to
understand the spoken and taken-for-granted identities, such as the dominant heteronormative
perspectives found in most children’s literature and television. It is equally essential that the
teacher support both types of critical literacy responses toward all types of texts including
LGBTQ-themed texts—production of identity and construction of subjectivity—which
encourages text inquiries as a way to possibly transform identity as well as effect social change
(Hagood, 2002).

38

Construction of Subjectivity. In contrast to identity production within critical literacy,
Hagood (2002) highlights how some theorists have shifted away from the institutional practice
that endorses producing multiple identities reflective of the dominant culture and instead chosen
to focus on the construction of subjectivity. Given that subjectivity, as a philosophical concept,
is situated within poststructuralism, and calls into question the notion fixed identities and binary
relationships such as the relationship between heterosexual and homosexual (Foucault, 1982). A
focus on subjectivity thus considers the reader as shifting, never fully aligning with one
particular identity. The difference in focusing on identity versus subjectivity depends on the
emphasis of the text (Hagood, 2002). Instead of relying on the text to produce multiple identities,
the reader as subject, speaks himself or herself into existence by viewing the text as merely a
platform for thought, with no definite or concrete meaning about the self (Hagood, 2002; Fuery,
1995). In contrast to the production of identity, construction of subjectivity is an exploration
which invites readers to play with texts as way to disrupt and displace localized meanings. In this
sense, readers are encouraged to construct and navigate through subjective perspectives based on
their individual beliefs and desires about the world. The reader, as subject, exercises power and
agency by directing his or her position in relation to the text. This type of critical literacy
approach views the readers as subjects able to push against structured identities presented in
texts. Critical literacy with a focus on subjectivity places the reader in an active position
(Alvermann & Hagood, 2000). Subjectivity thus encourages active engagement of the reader to
establish oneself by pushing away from staid representations that work to stabilize and situate the
reader within a singular identity (Hagood, 2002).
Resistance on the part of the reader accords with Freire’s (1970/2000) and Quintero’s
(2009) problem-posing application of critical literacy in that critical literacy invites the reader to

39

adopt an inquiry position or problem-posing stance about the text. Consequently, the meaning of
the text does not reside within the text itself, as the individual reader renders the meaning fluid
by constructing his or her interpretation in relation to himself of herself. Subjectivity disrupts the
need to categorize oneself within a particular identity or within multiple identities; instead, it
places the reader continually in a state of transformation. In this way, critical literacy, with a
focus on subjectivity, supports not only the examination of conflicting discourses and practices,
but also explores how various cultural, social, and historical factors shape our everyday
discourses in general (Hagood, 2002).
By focusing on the construction of subjectivity, students are invited to transform
themselves by going beyond the socially and institutionalized identity markers. Students should
be encouraged to resist and push back from identity markers including those related to all types
of gender expression and sexuality. Focusing on subjectivity allows students to direct their
attention toward the socialized and institutionalized practices upheld in society surrounding
sexuality and gender. Examining these practices should involve an analysis and ongoing
discussion about the dominant and missing voices of children’s literature as well as the
importance of constructing oneself among the varying and often conflicting representations
available in society.
Queer Theory
Queer Theory: Overview
In that my study focuses on diverse forms of sexuality and gender expression, queer
theory served as the second theoretical framework. This study required a theory which addressed
particular lived experiences of queer individuals. The primary purpose of queer theory is to
denaturalize stable categories related to the construction of sexuality and gender by examining
the production and effects of such classifications (Jagose, 1996). Queer theory calls into question
40

all binaries related to gender and sexuality. Wilchins (2004) notes that binaries, in particular with
sexuality and gender, are systemic in that they work to define one position as good and the other
as bad, causing binaries to be political and to assert unwarranted power. Queer theory prompts an
examination of the multiple understandings surrounding what it means to be a male or a female,
to be heterosexual or homosexual, or to be nurtured by same-sex parents or by a mother and
father (Oswald, Blume & Marks, 2005). Additionally, queer theory rejects the notion of what
“normal” is and means (Britzman, 1995) and in effect works to unsettle rigid constructions
connected to family, sexuality, and gender (Oswald et al., 2005).
Blackburn and Buckley (2005) assert that queer theory “is not the lumping together of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender, [but is instead]…the suspension of these classifications”
(p. 202). Blackburn and Buckley utilized queer theory as way to promote a queer-inclusive
literacy environment. Students examined the interconnectedness among sexuality, identity, and
literature by applying a queer lens in order to consider how LGBTQ students, as readers of
heterosexist texts, may find themselves as outsiders, not only within the classroom, but also in
relation to the assigned or available text. Bower and Klecka (2009), two other scholars who
studied teacher’s beliefs about LGBTQ parents, used a queer perspective as a way to question the
notion of normalcy regarding children with same-sex parents. Queer theory, according to Bower
and Klecka, allowed for an investigation into the dominant social norms by exploring hegemonic
constructions of acceptability, normalcy, and identity. In addition, queer theory works to
destabilize and trouble binary placements of normal and deviant.
In keeping with children’s literature and the study’s objective to invite participants to
examine representations about sexuality and gender in various texts, it is important to consider
how many children’s books depict females as nurturing feminine individuals, attentive to dress

41

and home, while males are portrayed as masculine, outspoken, and heroic (Martino & Mellor,
2002). These types of representations limit children’s knowledge about how men and women act
in society, in particular, and about gender performance, more generally. In order to problematize
such normative depictions, Ryan and Hermann-Wilmarth (2013) explored what it means to apply
queer theory to children’s literature. Ryan and Hermann-Wilmarth utilized queer theory as way
to not only deconstruct texts, but also disrupt interdependent categories such as sexuality and
gender. Ryan and Hermann-Wilmarth pointed out that since queer theory has been used to
analyze multiple texts, from historical records to pop culture, it is an appropriate theory for
deconstructing children’s literature. Furthermore, they argued that queer theory cannot impose a
type of sexuality onto any book since the book has already been sexed via the author and the
illustrator or both (Huskey, 2002) but it can encourage the identification of taken-for-granted
categories of identity around gender and sexuality that too often go unnoticed and undiscussed.
Queering familiar children’s literature also encourages extended conversations and textual
comparisons about sexuality and gender. Ryan and Hermann-Wilmarth asserted that educators
can apply queer theory to children’s books as a way to complicate the traditional homogenous,
heteronormative binaries of normal and perverse and make elementary language art curricula
more inclusive.
Although queer theory draws our attention to the privileging of heterosexuality within our
society, and in turn the valorization of heteronormativity, heterosexual practices become
problematic when presented as the only viable option (Blaise, 2010). Heterosexual practices are
embedded in what Butler (1999) refers to as the “heterosexual matrix” (p. 6), a means of
revealing how patterns and the discourse of heterosexuality are engrained in our everyday
thoughts and actions. For instance, assuming that every child has a mother and father in her or

42

his life, and thereby requiring that students create a mother’s day or father’s day card or display
conventional family photos within the classroom, silences or oppresses any other viable option
through mere lack of representation (Bower & Klecka, 2009; Janmohamed, 2010; Kosciw &
Diaz, 2008).
Additionally, queer theory investigates how heterosexual discourses influence the social
construction of gender (Warner, 1993). Children as young as two or three years of age may
exhibit gender variances, while children as young as three or four have displayed that their
gender identity is not aligned with the one assigned at birth (Boenke, 1999). Many studies
observe how young children during the preschool years begin to construct and seek knowledge
regarding gender (Freeman, 2007; Dykstra, 2005; Pollen, 2011; Trepanier-Street & Romatowski,
1999). With that in mind, Pollen (2011) argues that the tensions between the child’s right to
explore the world on the one hand and the overabundant and compulsive pressures of normative
gender roles suggested to children are exceedingly unbalanced.
In applying a queer perspective to their work, some scholars (Blaise, 2005; 2010;
Skattebol, 2006; DePalma & Atkinson, 2009) have used queer theory to illustrate how young
children produced and regulated gender within the early years. Tsao (2008) and Trepanier-Street
and Romatowski, (1999) studied the effects of using picturebooks with non-conforming gender
roles with younger children (55 months to preschool), and found that children’s attitudes towards
gender expression expanded. Gender is an essential dimension through which children make
sense of the social world and their place in it (Tsao, 2008; Taylor, 2003). Young children who
must create their own theories about both gender and sexuality, as Blaise (2010) urges, and by
default only receive normative understandings, must navigate the pressures of heteronormativity
in an unaccompanied and unequipped manner.

43

In that queer theory works to deconstruct rigid binaries and uncover the complexities
connected to sexuality and gender (Oswald et al, 2005), I used queer theory to actively
deconstruct the notion of binaries in general and to dismantle the position of homosexuality
versus heterosexuality as well as any and all gender constraints placed on individuals. In doing
so, I read LGBTQ-themed books aloud and called the participants’ attention to the diverse sexual
and gender representations by posing questions, breaking the silence, and deconstructing the
taboos associated with such representations in the classroom and within most children books.
Additionally, queer theory led me to recognize the participants’ responses that questioned
the formation of binaries as well as to analyze their consciousness efforts to discuss alternative
sexualities and gender roles in a quotidian manner; and as a result destabilize heteronormativity
in the classroom. In this manner, queer theory allowed me to complicate the conventional
heteronormative binaries which related to both gender and sexuality.
Contradictions: Queer Theory & Critical Literacy
Queer theory remains a contentious and contested field in that scholars’ attempts to
define queer theory have only revealed the vexed task of settling upon a static and mutually
agreed-upon meaning. The resistance and inability to stabilize queer theory into a clear-cut
meaning is in part what makes it an appealing and potential theory (Mallan, 2011). Because the
aims of queer theory and critical literacy may seem in contradiction, I am mindful of the possible
critiques that may occur in situating my study within these two frames.
First, I acknowledge that queer theory works to destabilize the notion of identity. Butler
(1999) not only considers the notion of identity to be a trap but also rejects the formation of
binaries. The central premise of queer theory is to include all images which “trouble” or mix
notions of male/female or homosexual/heterosexual. In keeping with queer theory which

44

questions the formation of identity and binaries, critical literacy was used in this study to
encourage participants to contemplate the overall existence of binaries related to sexuality and
gender. Moreover, queer theory was used in this study to examine the function and positionality
of binaries, such as superior vs. inferior or natural vs. deviant and in turn to consider the
positionality of all individuals within such binaries. Critical literacy facilitates a process of
deconstruction in that to understand “the manifold relationship of force that take shape and come
into play in the machinery of production” (Foucault, 1978, p.94), one must first deconstruct in
order to reconstruct. Critical literacy also facilitates a process of deconstruction in that the reader,
as subject, constructs his or her own identity in ways fitting to oneself. Harstock (1990) cautions
us against rejecting identity or categorical markers entirely, and Blackburn (2012) asserts that
“oppressed people need to be able to name power dynamics in order to work against them” (p.
19). Following this line of thought, critical literacy paved the way for the participants to
acknowledge the power dynamics related to diverse sexuality and gender identities and in turn
use queer theory to reflect about the confinement of identity markers and binaries in society.
Second, while critical literacy is an important element of literacy instruction which
supports students interrogating texts to construct an understanding about themselves and the
world (Moje, Young, Readence, & Moore, 2000), queer theory encouraged particular attention to
the ways in which our bodies, as texts, are constructed both socially and linguistically. In this
study, considering the body as text was also in keeping with the aims of queer theory. Butler
(1990) reminds us how our bodies obtain meanings and transmit messages through the types of
activities we perform. These meanings are inscribed and interpreted according to our
surroundings. In expanding upon Butler’s (1999) view, Stitzlein (2008) highlights how bodies
are not only socially constructed, but also linguistically formed. Speech and bodily performance

45

thus are interrelated to the social norms which govern gender and sexuality and thus, “bodies and
performativity have meaning as signs and signification that allow them to be culturally
recognized” (Stitzlein, 2008, p. 57). In the case of my pilot study (Bridgman, 2012), for example,
David, a preschooler, often defied the traditional roles of a boy by wearing princess dresses,
earrings, and assuming the role of Cinderella in search of a prince. As a subject (a human) and
text negotiating a place between the cultural expectations of how a boy should act and dress,
David often defended his preferences to classmates who would question his choices. Ultimately,
David was wedged in a power struggle relative to the social norms of sexuality and gender, and
more specifically in relation to how a young boy should dress and communicate. These meanings
are inscribed and interpreted according to our surroundings. With that in mind, examination of
the participants in this study included their responses in relation to how they communicated both
through performance and language within the classroom, but also how the participants made
sense of gender and sexuality by taking into account the author’s or illustrator’s decision to
depict characters in relation to their bodily movement or gestures in particular ways.
The final possible contradiction of this study was apparent in the researcher’s
assumptions that binaries related to gender or sexuality may have already formed in the
participants’ minds and that, by working to challenge the formation of binaries, the study might
stabilize these structures even more. Certain scholars (Blaise, 2010; Crisp & Hiller, 2011;
Davies, 2003; Hall, 2008; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2010) have argued that such rigid binaries exist
due to the multiple heteronormative perspectives available to children. Mindful that queer theory
attempts to discard accepted identities and binaries in general, I relied on critical literacy and
queer theory equally to support an equalitarian and fluidity perspective about all types of
sexuality and gender expression.

46

Benefits of Merging and Applying Critical Literacy and Queer Theory
Given that the study used critical literacy to focus on identity and subjectivity in relation
to the individual and in turn society, participants benefited from the application of queer theory
by keeping them engaged in the process of decentering oneself. Subjectivity calls upon the
individual to decenter oneself which differs from connecting to multiple identities (Hagood,
2002). Decentering entails resisting the urge to concede to multiple identities in an attempt to
remain fluid by never fully locating oneself to one particular identity. Decentering through
focusing on subjectivity, after reflecting on the multitude of socially-constructed identities,
allowed the participants, as readers, to speak themselves and construct themselves into existence
by using the texts to identify, reflect, and push back on the various sexual and gender types
representations available (Hagood, 2002; Oswald et al., 2005).
Next, subject formation, in accordance with critical literacy and queer theory, entailed
recognizing how the dominant culture not only works to mold individuals to follow their line of
thinking, but also ensures preservation of its own culture (Delpit, 2006; Darder, 1991). The
participants benefited from an examination of the culture of power (Delpit, 2006) which involves
recognizing how the dominant culture subjects other cultures to their ideological beliefs by
means of copious representations (Darder, 1991). Delpit (2006) posits the culture of power as a
reflection of those who have the most power in society. Understanding the culture of power
required that the participants analyze the process of identity. The dominant culture in this case,
the heterosexual individual, still holds the most power in society. Social power involves not only
the denial of certain rights to individual or adoption laws, but also the minimal representations
available that include same-sex parents or gender non-conforming characters. Survival and
success of the culture of power thus depends upon the acceptance and reproduction of the

47

culture. Such factors are at work in the classroom when primarily representations of the
dominant power are available (Delpit, 2006). Participants identified Delpit’s notion of the culture
of power by examining the diverse sexual and gender representations accessible in their
classroom, the library, and at home.
Finally, by examining the power of the dominant culture and the process of subjectivity
formation, the participants benefited from reflecting on questions which examined how normalcy
and abnormality become assigned subject positions (Luhmann, 1998). In doing so, participants
were invited to shift from thinking that “queerness is not a natural state of being” but instead
“queerness is produced as a contrast, as that against which normalcy is established” (Kumashiro,
2004, p.46). By challenging participants to reflect on the complexities related to identity,
subjectivity, and decentering, thus remaining rooted both in critical literacy and queer theory,
students became aware of how diverse sexual and gender expressions, in general, are a part of
human history. The participants reflected on the classification of sexuality and gender labels as
well as how these classifications influenced our current understandings (Lipkin, 2002). Overall,
the participants benefited from considering how their understanding of the world in relation to
sexuality and gender expression impacted the ways in which they connected to the text causing
them to replicate, reject, or recreate the representations within the book.
In sum, this chapter not only provided an overview of the existing scholarship in relation
to discussing sexuality and gender with young children but also compares the extant literature to
the study at hand. Next, the researcher’s reasons and reflections regarding the conceptual
frameworks demonstrate why critical literacy and queer theory were the best fit to analyze the
data.

48

The next chapter, methodology, consists of the research questions and overall design.
Also included in the chapter are descriptions of the collective case studies as well as the
researcher’s ethical considerations. Finally, the chapter concludes with information pertaining to
the research site, the participants, the various data sources, and how the data were analyzed.

49

Chapter 3
Method
To understand the complex thoughts of young children about sexuality and gender and to
provide explicit explanations about their understandings which are relevant and useful, this
project used a case study approach to answer the question of how children respond in particular
ways to these specific topics (Barone, 2011). The methodology for this study involved a
qualitative case study (Hancock & Algozzine, 2006) and more specifically a collective case
study design (Barone, 2011). A qualitative case study seeks to identify themes or categories of
behavior and includes an in-depth analysis of individual participants in a natural context
(Hancock & Algozzine, 2006). Deeper analysis includes examining the individual participants’
collectivity for similarities or differences across identified themes or categories (Barone, 2011).
For these reasons, a qualitative approach was best suited for this type of analysis in that the study
required an examination of the experiences of young children positioned as independent students
within a classroom, as peers alongside classmates, as well as children in an educational context
with an adult serving as a teacher.
Validity and Trustworthiness
Two specific threats to validity are researcher bias and reactivity. Each of these threats, as
preferred by Maxwell (2013), should be discussed independently from the methods section. First,
it is impossible to eliminate my positionality as a lesbian mother. I acknowledge this bias by
discussing my position throughout the study. Second, I discuss my role as researcher as well as
the ethical considerations taken in the methods section. Emerging themes of the study are
supported by concrete data in the individual case studies as well as in the overall findings.
Additionally, ensuring validity and trustworthiness on the part of the researcher includes

50

examining various criteria, such as, first, democratic validity and second, process validity
(Anderson, Herr, & Nihlen, 1994; Newton & Burgess, 2008). Democratic validity (Anderson,
Herr, & Nihlen, 1994; Newton & Burgess, 2008) involves researcher acknowledgment of her or
his points of view, as well as documenting such accounts. For this reason, I maintained a
researcher reflective journal in which I grappled with what the data suggested versus what I, as
the researcher, might be interpreting in light of my positionality. Process validity (Anderson,
Herr, and Nihlen, 1994, Newton & Burgess, 2008) requires that the researcher provide
descriptive explanations regarding the data collection and analysis processes. Validity, in this
sense, was met by providing a level of transparency to the processes which not only ensured
replication of the analysis but also demonstrated plausibility of the methods used in analyzing
multiple data sources. Plausibility of the methods included providing explicit descriptions of the
analysis process for each participant.
Precautions were put in place to ensure validity and trustworthiness which included
analyzing the various data sources as a way to uphold the multiplicity and fluidness of the
participants’ perspectives toward sexuality and gender (Ryan, 2010; Talburt, 2004). In doing so,
I collected data across multiple means. Next, I recorded data across multiple sites. Data was
primarily collected in a classroom at a daycare facility during an afterschool program in which
the critical readings of LGBTQ-themed books took place. Also, data collection consisted of
participants producing photographs of texts outside of the classroom. Finally, since the entire
study encouraged multiplicity through the multiple contexts and multiple data sources as well as
supported openness and fluidity of the participants’ views toward sexuality and gender, it seems
fitting that the study be contextualized in theoretical frames—critical literacy and queer theory—
which equally encourage multiplicity and fluidity.

51

Overview of Research Questions and Design of the Study
This study sought to examine how children respond to critical readings of LGBTQthemed children’s books as a way to explore their ways of thinking about sexuality and gender,
as well as to add to the extant body of research that supports curriculum change directed toward
incorporating these topics at the elementary level. The following questions guided this study:
1. How do young children respond (verbal and non-verbal) to LGBTQ representations
within children’s texts and to the topic of sexuality and gender in general via critical
literacy?
2.

How is critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender enacted by the

researcher assuming the role as teacher?
Research Design
A case study design was an appropriate method for examining individual readers’
responses to children’s literature to elicit data (Cunningham & Fitzgerald, 1996). A practical
goal as well as personal goal for this study was to call attention to the need to make the
curriculum more inclusive of LGBTQ individuals and their families at the elementary level. This
study, aligned with critical literacy and queer theory, required analysis of the people involved in
the teaching and learning transaction, and included both students and researcher serving as
teacher.
A collective case study (Barone, 2011; Hancock & Algozzine, 2006; Hatch, 2002)
allowed me to analyze each participant including myself as both researcher and teacher, in-depth
as a way to record statements and describe (Hancock & Algozzine, 2006) how critical readings
about sexuality and gender might occur in the elementary classroom. The case study was
bounded to each individual participant, including the three young participants and to the

52

researcher who assumed the role as teacher. Analysis of each participant included examining
individual verbal and non-verbal responses expressed though bodily physical movements and
facial expressions, such as remaining silent, looking downward, or refusing to comment.
In recruiting the participants, a purposeful criterion-based process (Patton, 2002) was
used to select students from diverse family structures (e.g., mother and father, same-sex, singleparent, divorced parent, etc.) as well as different ethnicities in order to increase the likelihood of
obtaining various responses. Additionally, analysis included examining the types of knowledge
and various sources (film, TV, family and friends) that each participant brought to the study
regarding sexuality and gender. The significance of this type of diversity provided me with
participants who may define sexuality and gender differently due to their family or ethnic
dynamic. Such elements were important to consider, as first, texts can serve as a stimuli for
activating prior experiences (Cochran-Smith, 1984) and, second, one out of ten children makes a
personal connection to texts based on their background or experiences (Sipe, 2008). The
recruitment process is discussed in more detail later in this chapter (see Participants).
Research Site and Context
This study was conducted in a preschool/daycare which also serves as an afterschool
facility located in a large city in a Midwestern state, Ohio. The site was selected because of its
reputation for valuing diversity, a reputation that is validated by the multiple children with samesex headed families who chose to enroll their children at this facility. The facility’s strong
reputation in the community for diversity was essential in that it ensured that the participants
might be either raised within a same-sex household or at least be aware of other children who
were. The study duration was 15 consecutive weeks. The period for the study was based on
wanting to work with and analyze the participants according to a typical semester, since an entire

53

school year of data collection was not possible. The objective was to investigate a site in which a
diverse group of young children and their families attend.
The first two weeks consisted of building a rapport with the participants and collecting
the pre-assessment drawing. The next twelve weeks consisted of reading LGBTQ-themed books.
Data was captured once a week for about an hour to an hour and a half. Before reading each
book, the weekly sessions included reviewing the author’s purpose from last week’s book as well
as making a prediction about the current week’s book. Critical sessions would include directing
the participants’ attention toward the diverse representations and answering any questions that
participants posed during the readings. At the conclusion of the book, participants were asked to
share why thought the author wrote the book. Additionally, participants were asked to respond to
one critical literacy question borrowed from Vasquez’s (2010) work with young children and
critical literacy. For a list of questions, see section Critical Literacy later in the chapter. All
responses were welcomed and none of the responses were labeled as incorrect. If participants
struggled to identify the author’s purpose, particularly at the beginning of the critical reading
sessions, the teacher provided scaffolding by offering an additional response to the author’s
purpose. Following the critical reading sessions, participants completed weekly critical literacy
drawings at a table located in the same room as the reading sessions. Participants were given the
prompt to draw what thought the author would want them to remember the most about the book.
Once participants had completed their drawings, the researcher asked each participant to describe
their drawing. Student responses were captured on the back of each drawing. Each week
provided a consistent routine for the participants which simplified the data collection process by
primarily focusing on conducting critical reading of LGBTQ-themed books.

54

Historical and Political Context within Ohio. The Midwest setting for this study
represents a unique contribution given that the particular state, Ohio, at the onset of the study
was still upholding a legislative ban on gay marriage. Multiple lawsuits concerning the rights of
LGBTQ people took place in Ohio from 2013 to 2014. Lawsuits ranged from gay couples having
access to the Affordable Care Act, to having gay couples recognized on death certificates, to
fighting the marriage ban (http://huffingtonpost.com/tag/ohio-gay). In the past three years,
various articles ranging from educational journals to magazine and newspaper pieces have
surfaced demonstrating the anti-gay climate in Ohio schools. Smith Amos (2011) claims that the
bullying statistics are higher in Ohio schools than what most schools report to state and federal
agencies. For instance, 70% of students stated that they were sexually harassed, 61% were cyberbullied and 57% had items damaged or stolen all in due part to their sexual or gender orientation
(Smith Amos, 2011). In another incident, when a flyer was posted in an Ohio high school in
support of forming a Gay-Straight Alliance club, which welcomes all sexual and gender diversity
to join a support group, an adversary parent contacted a news station with concerns (Reid, 2014).
Such historical and political contexts are important to consider as students and families described
in this study reside within a state which continues to struggle with the topic of diverse sexuality
and gender expression.
Participants
Gaining Access to Student Participants. In order to maximize the opportunity to recruit
participants, the study took place after the beginning of the school year and before spring break
commenced. A purposeful criterion-based sampling (Patton, 2002) was used in selecting the
participants who would participate in critical readings of LGBTQ-themed books. The criteria for
the case study entailed that the student participants be between the ages of 4-years-old to 7 years-

55

old and be able to verbally express themselves independently. Participants who spoke with ease
in the presence of others and freely shared opinions were kept in the selection process. This type
of participant sampling allowed me to construct a small group of students with information-rich
cases. The young student participants represented: awareness and presence of same-sex parents,
single or divorced parents, mother and father households, as well as various ethnicities.
Information-rich participants (Patton, 2002) were selected according to the age criteria between 4
to 7, their family structure, and their willingness to actively participate in the critical reading
sessions. Three student participants, out of a total of 5, along with myself as the teacher
participant, were chosen to observe in-depth.
The initial recruitment information was gathered in various ways. First, the researcher
asked the director to select participants according the age criteria and to the willingness of the
parents to allow their child to participate in the study. After consent forms were returned, the
researcher relied on the director’s personal experience and judgment about each child to
determine those students best suited for the study. For instance, students with a history of
disruptive behavior or who were reserved in nature were removed from the list of potential
participants. Five participants initially met the criteria, but two were eliminated due to their lack
of desire to actively participate in the critical reading sessions. The final three participants
studied in-depth met the criteria of having a unique family structure or difference in the sense
that each of their families were unlike the other participants. The final three participants had
solid verbal skills and continually demonstrated a desire to participate. Upon obtaining parent
consent, the researcher explained the study in simplified terms by describing that the study
would include reading books and asking questions and that each session would be videotaped.

56

Table 3.1 provides a brief overview of the general characteristics of the student participants; each
student is discussed in further detail below.
Table 3.1
Characteristics of Student Population
______________________________________________________________________________
Student

Age

Sex

Grade

Hank

7

Male

Kindergarten

Family Uniqueness

Mother and Father, identical
twin, White
Jerry
7
Male
First Grade
Mother and Father, middle
child, White
Page
6
Female
Kindergarten
Divorced Mother and Father,
African-American
______________________________________________________________________________
Note. Family Uniqueness refers to how the participant’s families were different according to the
other participants.
Student 1. Hank, White, was in Kindergarten and was seven years. He and his brother
had a birthday after the first week into the study. Hank lives with his mother and father and
identical twin. Hank’s brother also took part in the study, but Hank was selected to examine
more in-depth as he often generated creative comments and drew fantastical images. His
interpretations and contributions to the study were purposeful in that Hank represents the
autonomous and individualistic students who are representative in most classrooms. Hank
interpreted the world in unique ways and was not easily persuaded by others’ opinions or
thoughts. For instance, after reading a book in which a liberal princess demands her suitors to
slay animals and perform dangerous feats, Hank’s response to the critical question about what
surprised you the most about the book, consisted of: “I like the ending of the book cause her [the
princess] is holding up her drink.” Others participants remarked on the princess not wanting to
marry or the suitors fighting in hazardous conditions to win the princess. Hank instead focused
on the picture at the end of the book which depicted the princess celebrating her unwed days by
57

drinking a commemorative beverage and raising it in air. It is uncertain as to whether Hank was
drawn to the picture because the princess was elated to have maintained her single status or
because he enjoyed viewing the princess raise her glass and simply having fun. Regardless, the
positive and celebratory outcome for the princess caught Hank’s attention in such a way that he
viewed it as the most surprising element of the book.
Student 2. Jerry, White, was in first grade raised by his mother and father in the same
household and was a middle child. He had two other brothers. Jerry readily supplied responses
and shared his thoughts or concerns with ease. He was the most demonstrative boy in the group.
Jerry often challenged, inquired, or supplied additional information about the books throughout
the critical reading sessions. For instance, while reading The Family Book (Parr, 2010) which
depicts various family structures, Jerry adds, “Some people have three,” after hearing the section
of the book: Some families have one parent instead of two (Parr, 2010, 16). Jerry’s response not
only demonstrates awareness about different family sizes but also demonstrates how at ease he
felt in the classroom to offer unsolicited and dissimilar information from the read aloud page.
Jerry also felt comfortable in sharing predictions and would voluntarily acknowledge when his or
his classmates’ predictions differed from the books. For instance, Jerry would often state, “we
were wrong” as soon as he realized that his or his classmates predictions differed.
Student 3. Page, the final student participant, was in kindergarten and was being raised
by her divorced mother and father. Page is African-American. Unlike the other participants, Page
did not have any siblings, yet she talked often about her cousins and other extended family
members. Although Page was the only girl in the study, she positioned herself as an equal by
participating as much as, if not more than the boys participated. Page often asserted herself,
would correct the others if they mispronounced a word, or did not follow my directions for the

58

drawing assignment. She posed several questions and was equally eager to answer all of mine.
Over the course of the readings, Page often asserted her ethnic difference by including AfricanAmerican characteristics in the drawings as well as made comments referring to her ethnic
heritage. For instance, after reading the The Family Book (Parr, 2010) about various families,
Page shared, “My family is all the same color, but some of my cousins are darker.” In two of her
illustrations, Page depicted characters with which she calls “afros” even though the original
characters did not have any of these features.
Researcher and Teacher. As a researcher advocating for curriculum change to include
critical literacy discussions surrounding sexuality and gender topics in the classroom, I felt it
essential to include my voice in the process as the researcher assuming the role of teacher. By
assuming the roles of both teacher and researcher, I gained knowledge and skill in research
methods and became aware of the options and possibilities for pedagogical change (Johnson,
1993). Teachers participating in such roles become more critical and reflective about their
practice, and about the whole approach of teaching in general (Street, 1985). Teacher research in
part forces re-evaluation of current theories and can greatly influence what is understood about
what takes place in the classroom (Johnson, 1993). Wolfe (2006) believes that teachers often
leave their mark, in terms of influencing their students in the classroom, but seldom mark their
profession, meaning that teachers should equally mark and influence pedagogical changes in the
classroom. With that in mind, I included myself as a participant in hopes marking the profession
by recognizing the importance and necessity of incorporating such topics at the elementary level.
This mark would entail providing experiences and perspectives as the teacher outlining
my successes and challenges faced when applying critical literacy to LGBTQ-themed literature,
so that fellow teachers and researchers might envision not only student responses but also the

59

teacher’s. Following an analysis of a teacher research report, I considered the steps taken by
teacher researchers in the field (Hoffman, Afflerbach, Duffy-Hester, McCarthey & Baumann,
2014). In doing so, I examined questions around student inquiries concerning sexuality and
gender as well as the application of critical literacy with elementary students. Second, while
assuming the role as teacher, I worked to position myself equally alongside the participants
learning and engaging in the critical discussions by allowing for responses unrelated to sexuality
and gender to occur. Thirdly, I accepted that, as researcher and teacher, I would struggle with the
dual roles and expected to feel uneasy at times. In order to capture and add authenticity to the
overall study, I became an equal participant in the study and adopted a narrative style to reflect
on both as a researcher and as a teacher while writing in the researcher’s journal. At the end of
each data collection, I reflected by capturing the details of the day as well as my thoughts about
the readings and students. Such data serves as one of the collective case studies in the overall
study.
Book Selection
The purpose of reading LGBTQ-themed children’s books was not only to provide
students with diverse representations of sexuality and gender, but more importantly to conduct
critical readings of these texts. Out of the twelve books (see Table 3.2) used in this study, seven
were used in my pilot study (Bridgman, 2012) with a group of preschoolers ranging in ages from
4 to 5. The decision to incorporate the same LGBTQ-themed books was based on reasons of
researcher familiarity, LGBTQ popularity, and accessibility. A book was determined to be
LGBTQ-themed if the text offered diverse and positvie representations outside of the
conventional sexuality and gender norms. LGBTQ-themed books were also selected according to
articles referencing LGBTQ-themed books (Fox, 2007; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2007; Rowell, 2007)

60

or studies that had used such books with students (Rice, 2002; Sapp, 2010; Schall & Kauffman,
2003). One book was read each week, starting with the third week and lasting to the fourteenth
week (Table 3.2). Starting with the third week, and thereafter all odd data collection weeks, the
book included a same-sex parent representation. On the even data collection weeks, starting with
the fourth week, the book included a text portraying a character who defied or challenged
conventional gender roles. Critically reading LGBTQ-books allowed participants to reflect why
the author or illustrator opted to include such representations as well as consider how these
representations compared and contrasted to those in other children’s literature. Although some of
the storylines represented in LGBTQ-themed books may uphold heterosexual or gender
conventions, such as marriage or wanting to be a princess, these conventions intentionally were
chosen as a way to equally include LGBTQ individuals in commonplace storylines and in turn
interrupt heteronormativity.
Additionally, the reading level for each book was taken into consideration. Reading
levels were obtained using Accelerated Reader, Lexile, or suggested age range from various
websites. The lowest reading level book was suggested for readers three years of age with the
highest reading level suggested for readers nine years of age.
Overall, the majority of the books were suggested for students in the second grade or
below. This range of reading level aligns with the participant selection process in that the
criterion is that the children will be between the ages of four to seven. To compensate for the
varied reading levels, the teacher researcher read the books aloud and posed questions
throughout the readings to ensure that participants understood the purpose of the diverse
representations.

61

Table 3.2
LGBTQ-themed Books
Weeks

LGBTQ-Themed Books

3rd

The Family Book
(Parr, 2010)

4th

Olivia
and the Fairy Princesses
(Falconer, 2012)

Sexuality or Gender
Representation
Same-Sex Parent

Suggested
Age Range
3-5 years

Gender Role

3-8 years

5th

Emma and Meesha
My Boy: A Two Mom
Story (Considine, 2005)

Same-Sex Parent

3-7 years

6th

Princess Smartypants
(Cole, 1986)

Gender Role

4-8 years

7th

King & King & Family
(de Haan & Nijland, 2004)

Same-Sex Parent

5-8 years

8th

The Paper Bag Princess
(Munsch, 1995)

Gender Role

4-7 years

9th

Donovan’s Big Day
(Newman, 2011)

Same-Sex Parent

3-7 years

10th

My Princess Boy
(Kilodavis, 2010)

Gender Role

4-8 years

11th

A Tale of Two Daddies
(Oelschlager, 2010)

Same-Sex Parent

4-7 years

12th

The Boy with Pink Hair
(Hilton, 2011)

Gender Role

3-5 years

13th

The White Swan Express:
A Story about Adoption
(Okimoto & Aoki, 2002)

Same-Sex Parent

4-7 years

14th

10,000 Dresses
Gender Role
5-9 years
(Ewert, 2008)
______________________________________________________________________________

62

Data Collection and Sources
Data collection occurred throughout a fifteen week period in which I spent approximately
an hour with the participants, once a week. Data collection consisted of pre- and postassessments, fourteen transcribed video recordings of critical readings, participant and field
observations, an artifact collection of tangible drawings, as well as the researcher’s journal. The
hour of observation each collection day included critically reading a book, focused on sexuality
or gender, followed by a critical discussion, as well as examining the participants in the
classroom alongside their classmates.
Analyzing multiple forms of data helps to strengthen the approaches of each method
while minimizing the limitations of any one (Patton, 2002). The first week consisted of primarily
observations which consisted of watching the participants interact with each other as well as
communicating with them one-on-one. The first week allowed the participants to become
acquainted with my presence in the classroom as well as to build a rapport with the core
participants. The second week consisted of observing and learning more about the participants as
well as collecting the pre-assessment data. By the third week, the participants were video
recorded during the critical readings and discussions. Observations included all aspects of the
teaching and learning transaction, from behaviors and actions to words and activities.
Participants were asked to make predictions about the context of the book by examining the
cover and illustrations. Multiple questions were posed during each reading to ensure that
participants were engaged and to document their reactions to the book. In general, each critical
reading session included making predictions about the book, making intertextual connections to
other texts inside and outside of the site, as well as posing a targeted critical question.

63

Pre- and Post-Assessments
Pre- and post-assessments occurred during the second and last week of the study. The
pre and post-assessments involved drawing a self-made character that each participant would like
to read about in a book. This self-made character could be one in which they created by
combining multiple attributes of other characters, a character which is unique and never been
represented in a book, or finally an already represented character in which they would like to see
and read more about in other books. The purpose of the pre-assessment was to evaluate which
representations, by means of literature previously read or observed, resonated the most with the
participants. For instance, participants who depicted a heterosexual family, a conventional war
hero, or a princess, granted me access to knowing that these types of representations were either
most accessible or most preferable. Having this type of information allowed me to further
explore and better understand why each participant drew or wrote about his or her character. The
purpose of the post-assessment was two-fold. First, I evaluated the post-assessments to determine
if LGBTQ characters or non-traditional gender representations appeared in the post drawing after
critically reading LGBTQ-themed books with such characters. Second, participants who included
LGBTQ characters or non-traditional gender representations in the post assessment, but not in
the pre-assessment, were examined further as means to decipher what changes occurred from the
pre and post assessments. For instance, did the drawing reflect more of gender or sexuality focus
and how did the post-assessment drawing compare to the data represented across the other data
sources for the participant.
Video Recordings of Critical Readings
Video recordings of critical readings occurred once a week for approximately an hour of
each data collection day. Critical readings included reading one LGBTQ-themed book during

64

each session. Books alternated between focusing on sexuality by including diverse sexual
representations or gender by offering non-conforming gender roles. At the conclusion of each
book, students completed a reflective drawing about what they thought the author or illustrator
thought was the most important element of the story. Following a discussion about each of the
reflective drawings, participants engaged in a critical discussion aimed at answering the weekly
critical question adapted from Vasquez’s (2010) critical literacy work with young children.
Video and audio recordings were viewed and transcribed within 48 hours of the original
recording. Non-verbal communication and body language, such as avoiding eye contact or
frequently changing body positions, were examined which added to capturing richer descriptions
of participants(Strauss & Corbin, 1990). During the readings and discussions based on the
LGBTQ-themed texts, I analyzed not only how participants interacted with the texts, but also if
and how they made sense of the power issues during the critical discussions. For instance, I
observed whether participants agreed with or refuted the perspectives of others about the
author’s or illustrators overall purpose of the book. Additionally, I examined whether the
participants displayed empathetic, distrustful or indifferent reactions through words or gestures,
as well as whether they chose to represent the missing voices by making their classroom more
inclusive of diverse sexuality and gender.
Participant and Field Observations
Observations occurred during and after the critical readings, first in the classroom, and
second with an analysis of the video recordings of the critical readings. Both types of data
presented several advantages to the study. Direct observations are crucial in examining
interactions and behaviors within a particular context (Patton, 2002; Yin 2003). In observing the
interactions between the researcher and the students, analysis of the data included not only how

65

the students responded to critical literacy but also the willingness with which students explored
topics related to sexuality and gender. The objective of the field observations was to examine
whether children act, talk, or play in ways that illustrate positive, negative, or indifferent views
toward diverse sexuality and gender. Positive responses included participants actively engaging
in storytime and connecting elements of their lives to the book and thus being open to the diverse
themes of sexuality and gender. These responses were coded Student Replicates. Negative
responses included participants actively refusing to make any connections to the book and thus
actively refusing the theme of the diverse books. These responses were coded Student Rejects.
Indifferent responses, which were coded as such, included participants who did not participate in
the sessions by means of continually remaining quiet, looking in different directions, not
answering the questions posed, and playing with other toys in the room instead of participating in
the critical reading sessions. Each week, participants’ responses were transcribed and analyzed.
Responses from two participants were continually recorded as indifferent. These participants
were eventually eliminated from the study due to their unwillingness to remain engaged during
the critical readings. Finally, participants were equally observed as unique individuals as well as
students situated within a classroom and surrounded by peers and teachers. For instance, I paid
attention to how they positioned themselves alone as opposed to in a group, and how they
expressed themselves orally and through bodily gestures.
Critical readings, which consisted of analyzing, discussing and comparing the
representations in children’s texts based on the premise that texts are neither neutral or nor
apolitical artifacts (Ryan & Hermann-Wilmarth, 2013), occurred in a small side room sectioned
away from other participants not participating in the study. Participants were informed that the
study consisted of reading books for the purpose of analyzing the author’s purpose. Consent

66

forms informed parents that books would include diverse representations of sexuality and
gender. The video camera was situated across from all the participants to capture each participant
engaging in the critical literacy sessions. The data collected from the video recordings served as
a means to conduct field observations both of me, the researcher taking on the role as teacher, as
well as the participants. Additional direct observations took place after the critical readings
which involved observing the participants in the classroom while completing the critical literacy
drawings.
Artifact Collection
Student artifacts, such as drawings and photographs, either produced or brought in by the
participants to the research site supplemented the other data sources. Student artifacts are
considered appropriate data sources which provide an additional lens to study the central
research question (Patton, 2002; Yin, 2003). The two main artifacts of the study included weekly
critical drawings and photographs. After each reading, participants drew a picture about what
they thought the author or illustrator wanted the reader to remember the most about the book. For
each drawing, the researcher then wrote a brief description stated by the student. Additionally,
participants provided photographs taken from portable cameras during three different intervals of
the study. Each participant received a camera during the second week of the study and kept the
camera until all photographs were taken. The photographs allowed the participants to convey
their personal interests by taking pictures based on three different themes as well as allowed the
researcher to examine the representations which capture the participants’ attention outside of the
critical reading sessions. For each theme, participants were asked to take eight pictures. The
three themes served as the photography assignment:


Week 2: Take 8 pictures of favorite books in your classroom, your house, or local library

67



Week 4: Take 8 pictures of your favorite characters in books



Week 6: Take 8 pictures of your favorite movie or TV show characters.

At the conclusion of the study, photographs were processed at a local drugstore and examined
collectively from each participant’s view. The photographs allowed me to examine which
representations resonated with each participant and to observe any similarities or differences
across the group. Participants were asked to take pictures as a way to bridge the literacy between
various contexts, and to connect the critical readings focused on the topic of sexuality and gender
to other texts outside of the critical reading sessions. This type of artifact collection provided an
additional lens to examine the participants’ understanding about sexuality and gender before,
during, and after the critical readings.
Researcher Reflective Journal
Functioning as the researcher, teacher, and participant required me to take copious notes
about assuming these multiple roles. Doing so required that I reflected about these positions at
the conclusion of each data collection day. Keeping a researcher reflective journal is an essential
and interpretive tool (Slotnick & Janesick, 2011). Slotnick and Janesick (2011) argue that a
researcher reflective journal is a valid data source in that the journal allows the researcher to
refine oneself as the research instrument throughout the study. Furthermore, Slotnick and
Janesick assert that reflective journaling aids the researcher in several ways (a) by allowing the
researcher to refine the meaning and interpretation of his or her role within the study, (b) to
better understand the participants’ responses, (c) to practice journal writing as a way to become
connoisseurs of one’s own thinking patterns and in turn research instrument, and (d) to create a
cohesive and deeply textured analysis of the study. With these points in mind, I also incorporated
the researcher reflective journal as a way to take copious notes on the subject of critical literacy

68

and queer theory, as well as LGBTQ topics in general that were applicable to the participants.
Next, I dialogued with myself and posed questions about the study. For instance, I noted whether
participants seemed engaged and motivated to participate in particular sessions and worked to
evaluate and compare those responses to days when participants appeared nonresponsive to the
readings.
Overall the researcher’s reflective notes allowed me to capture rich perspectives
(Seidman, 2006) ranging from discussing sexuality and gender with the participants to
implementing a critical literacy approach in the classroom. The journal was organized according
to my position as teacher and as researcher; reflections about both were taken during each
journaling process. As a research tool and additional source of data, the journal became a
“connective tissue” fusing the multiple data sources (Progroff, 1992, p. 14).
Situating the Collective Case Study within the Conceptual Frameworks
The case study methodology was situated at the intersection of critical literacy and queer
theory. Qualitative methods such as observations, collecting participant produced artifacts, and
keeping a researcher journal encouraged understanding participants within their natural setting
(Hatch, 2002). Understanding the participants meant examining them as group members and as
individuals working to make sense of their experiences and everyday situations and in particular
their conceptualizations of sexuality and gender. The methods used in the study support the
gathering of rich descriptions about how students might respond to critical readings of LGBTQthemed children’s literature focused on sexuality and gender and how such readings might occur
in the elementary classroom. Data was referenced according to the research questions. Data
analysis proceeded from a critical literacy and queer theory framework. Data which did not
respond to the research questions or coincide with the theoretical approaches was not analyzed.

69

For instance, data which was not representative of the ways in which the participants responded
to readings of LGBTQ-themed texts via critical literacy or demonstrated the multiplicity and
complexity of production of identity, construction of subjectivity, and queer theory were not
included. Excluded data examples include participants speaking about what they ate for lunch or
discussing their math homework assignment.
In short, qualitative methods more generally, and a collective case study approach more
specifically, allowed me to gather data which valued the context, the group, and the individual
with respect to the various ways the participants made meaning surrounding the topic of
sexuality and gender.
Critical Literacy
The methodology intersects with critical literacy in various ways. First, the study sought
to note the participants’ reactions to critical readings. Second, the participants took part in
weekly critical conversations by responding to a set of critical literacy questions formulated by
Vasquez (2010) in her critical literacy work with children. Finally, as a researcher and mother, I
worked to spotlight the ways in which classrooms could enact change particularly through
student empowerment and knowledge.
Collecting and analyzing data in line with critical literacy involved two essential
components. First, the following critical literacy discussion prompts (Vasquez, 2010) served as a
classroom framework for reading and discussing LGBTQ-themed books.
1. Why do you think people should or should not read these books?
2. What surprised you about these books?
3. What questions do you have about the stories? What questions would you ask the author
or illustrator?

70

4. What are one or two things from your own life that connect to these stories?
5. Write one or two statements about people who may be like the characters in these stories.
Discuss how you think they may feel when they read these books.
6. Write one or two things about people who are not represented in these books. Why do
you think the author wrote a story about different families or about a boy who dreams
about dresses?
Additionally, at the conclusion of each book, each participant drew a reflective picture
and described what he or she thought the author or illustrator wanted the reader to remember the
most about the book. Such an approach positioned the readers as researchers of language and text
by examining the implied message of the text (Vasquez, 2010, 2005). In conjunction, with
weekly discussion prompts and reflective drawings, participants took three sets of photographs,
each consisting of at least eight pictures focused on a particular theme. Themes were selected as
way a for participants to compare and contrast the LGBTQ representations offered in our critical
reading sessions to those representations outside of the research site.


Take eight pictures of favorite books in your classroom, your house, or local library



Take eight pictures of your favorite characters in books



Take eight pictures of your favorite movie or TV show characters on screen or on a DVD
cover
Collecting and analyzing data in alignment with a critical literacy approach consisted of

documenting each participant’s responses in a critical literacy chart. Documentation included
examining the ways each participant responded to all readings which could range from actively
sharing individual viewpoints and observing others before responding to not participating in the
discussion overall. Based on analyzing young children while reading LGBTQ-books in my pilot

71

study (Bridgman, 2012), I assessed whether each participant actively, moderately, or minimally
participated in the critical readings. Notes about participants who responded similarly to each
discussion or books that yielded favorable or unfavorable reactions from participants were added
to the chart in order to locate or identify particular themes.
Applying critical literacy with a focus on a particular topic may in some instances silence
other social issues that students might raise independently. For that reason, and following the
advice of Vasquez (2010), I sought to generally construct a flexible space that attended to
viewpoints outside of sexuality and gender. For instance, participants who supplied additional
social justice perspectives, such as the dominant presence of mostly Caucasians portrayed in
LGBTQ-themed books, were welcomed and discussed. Doing so allowed me to understand the
perplexing components of the world through my participants’ eyes while reading LGBTQthemed books together.
In this way, critical literacy not only remained in line with Freire and other critical
pedagogies (Edelsky, 1991; Freire, 1970/2000) but also allowed me to recognize the various
interpretations of my participants as well as support the notion of “reading the world” (Freire &
Macedo, 1987, p. 29) versus just reading the “word.” In sum, critical literacy aligned to my
methodology by framing the discussions, documenting the multifaceted experiences of my
participants, validating the participants’ meanings about texts, and most importantly inviting the
participants to problematize texts by addressing the issue of dominance and marginalization in
society.
Queer Theory
The methodology used in this study equally intersects with queer theory in several ways.
First, the study sought to document participants’ responses to LGBTQ-themed children’s books.

72

Second, the participants engaged in conversations about diverse sexualities and genders. Thirdly,
as a queer researcher, I felt comfortable to queer parts of the classroom and the curriculum to
encompass all sexualities and gender expression.
Collecting and analyzing data through a queer lens consisted of maintaining individual
participants’ charts documenting their viewpoints about sexuality and gender. In creating the
charts, I struggled with how I would consider each participant as unique with a set of individual
characteristics. I pondered how I would identify and describe each participant, and more
importantly, the ways in which each one would express himself or herself. What was the best
way to account for the diversity and differences among each of the participants’ families? What
words and descriptions would best reflect my participants’ individual understandings revolving
sexuality and gender? To what degree would my homosexual understandings influence the ways
I described and defined non-gender conforming responses or alternative sexualities in the chart?
To deal with these questions, I reflected on the overall premise of queer theory which
resists being defined for reasons of protecting sexual and gender fluidity (Pinar, 1998). In
looking at similar literacy and queer theory research with students, Ryan (2010) asserts that, “a
focus on the myth of normalcy writ large implicates not just those who identify as LGBTQ, but
people of all sexualities, including the children…” (p.66). It is imperative thus to consider how
people of all experiences and preferences are positioned in society (Ryan, 2010) simply through
the notion of compulsory heterosexuality (Rich, 1980) which demonstrates how heterosexuality
is imposed and reinforced by social constraints (i.e., heterosexual images of couples in wedding
or valentine photos, heterosexual representations of families during holidays, and so forth).
In this way queer theory allowed me to document various interpretations of sexuality and
gender in ways that reflected my participants, but also resisted the imposed conditions of

73

heterosexuality and in turn heteronormativity by validating multiple understandings in the
classroom. In sum, queer theory aligned to my methodology by spotlighting the lived
experiences of my participants and encouraging flexible representations which honored multiple
voices and meanings of the participants surrounding sexuality and gender.
Collectively critical literacy and queer theory highlighted the fluid and dynamic ways in
which sexuality and gender could be addressed in the classroom. Together critical literacy and
queer theory support a comprehensive and diverse route for thinking about the social and queer
lives of people in society and their families in a respectful and fitting way for young students.
Role of Researcher: Ethical Considerations
Certain ethical considerations were attended to during the data collection and analysis
process. For instance, I contemplated how my presence as a teacher and researcher, as well as
my queer values, might shape not only the classroom observations but also my interpretations of
the data (Maxwell, 2013). These issues were included in the researcher’s journal. Journal entries
were completed on each data collection day. Journal entries included what it meant to be
LGBTQ identified and a same-sex parent conducting a study aimed at increasing LGBTQ equity
in schools. Journal entries also included thoughts about applying critical literacy as a way to
discuss sexuality and gender with children. Such reflections forced me to remain cognizant of
my positionality toward the research. To ensure as much of an unbiased position as possible, I
examined various data sources for consistent themes, explored contradictions and unexpected
findings, and followed up on themes within the data by analyzing the stronger prevalence of
some themes over others (Rubin & Rubin, 2012). Doing so provided an extra level of credibility
to the study by ensuring that the participants’ responses were interpreted authentically.

74

Brydon-Miller (2012) suggests that researchers must also recognize the power dynamics
that exist within a community of participants. For instance, I thought about the power dynamics I
brought to the site, both as the researcher and as an acting teacher who assumed an active role in
the study by conducting the critical readings. To distribute the power among the participants, I
constructed an open environment by welcoming participants’ comments, both on-topic as well as
off-topic participant responses were validated. Angrosino and Mays De Perez (2003) assert,
however, that identities as either the researcher or teacher should remain in flux through ongoing
interaction with participants. Constructing a solid and trustworthy rapport with the participants
began with sharing my multiple identities: a researcher, a member of the classroom, a teacher, a
parent, and a LGBTQ member. Doing so created a space for participants to position me in
various identities while also opening the conversation for them to share their various positions.
With that in mind, ethical considerations were taken into account surrounding the
identities of the young participants. Participants had pseudonyms to protect their identity and
although participants’ caregivers gave consent, children were also given the option to refuse
participation in the study on any given data collection day. Finally, when working with young
children, Cohen (1971) cautions researchers to grasp how our personal associations shape our
interpretations. For instance, adjectives in general, such as “sensitive,” “sloppy,” “tomboyish,”
and “helpless,” could vary according to the observer. For that reason, interpretations regarding
the participants included thick and rich descriptions which conveyed children’s specific actions
and were void of ambiguous descriptions.
Data Analysis
Analyzing the data across multiple sources provided me with an expansive view of the data
and allowed me to identify reoccurring codes and themes. Data analysis occurred at the initial

75

stages of the collection process; I analyzed and coded all data sources including pre- and postassessments, video recordings of critical readings, student artifacts, and the researcher reflective
journal. All data was coded using qualitative open coding procedures (Strauss & Corbin, 1990)
as a means to identify themes in relation to the research questions. For example, a chart was
made for each student participant to document the participant’s responses to the critical readings
with a focus on sexuality and gender. Since sexuality and gender are mostly interrelated
constructs, some participant responses were coded as both sexuality and gender. Analysis of each
data set occurred and was charted individually to establish themes across the various data
sources. By analyzing various data sources related to the research questions, I was able to
highlight data that specifically attended to the research questions and in turn identify themes.
Figure 3.1 demonstrates the data analysis process of this study.
Figure 3.1 Data Analysis Process
______________________________________________________________________________
Develop
general idea
of data

Identify frames
(opening
coding)

Establish
Search for
domains
themes
(focused
(categorizing)
coding)
______________________________________________________________________________
Pre- and post-assessments
Pre- and post-assessments required students to draw a character they would like to see in
a book. Participants could either create a character using their imagination or represent a
character already presented in another text. Pre-assessments and post-assessments were analyzed
to whether the participant included or did not include representations related to conventional
norms regarding sexuality and gender. For instance, one participant drew a mother, father, and
little girl which was coded as a sexuality representation since the family represented a

76

heterosexual family structure. Additionally, post-assessments were analyzed according to
whether the participant began to consider other characters outside the conventional norms in
regards to sexuality and gender and consequently included unconventional norms in their post
assessments.
Video recordings of Critical Readings
Erickson (1982) recommends a four stage process to analyzing audiovisual data. Heeding
this advice, I analyzed each video first as a whole event to then increasingly smaller components.
This process consisted of (a) reviewing the whole event (b) identifying the major constituent
segments of the event and, (c) identifying the aspects within a particular main segment and the
actions of the individuals. Once a week, audiovisuals were analyzed under a critical literacy and
queer theory lens. In applying Erickson’s four-step process, I was able to identify emerging
themes as well as conduct a closer examination for sub-codes. Sub-codes were identified after
examining the actions of the participants in relation to a larger theme.
Transcriptions occurred with 48 hours of the original recording followed by an analysis
which included first reading the data to develop a general idea. Continual non-verbal
communication or unwillingness to participate (e.g., participants playing with other toys in the
room, not responding to questions) resulted in recognizing two participants who were not
responsive to critical readings focused on sexuality and gender as well as recognizing three
participants who remained engaged in the process.
Next, data analysis included coding the data according to whether the student responses
spoke to directly a gender or sexuality representation or both. For instance, one of the
participants stated that “there were no girl colors or boy colors”, this statement was coded as
“gender representation”. If student responses offered connections to sexuality as well as gender,

77

responses were coded as both. Deeper analysis occurred until categories within the data were
established which resulted in identifying three types of students’ responses.
Video recordings were equally analyzed in order to examine how the researcher could
enact literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender. Transcripts of the researcher assuming the
role as teacher were analyzed for ways in which the teacher garnished the attention of the
participants and used critical literacy to keep the participants engaged and focused on sexuality
and gender. Four codes were identified which resulted in establishing two overall categories in
order to answer how a teacher could enact critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender.
Participant and Field Observations
As with the video recordings and the other data sources, data was first coded according
to whether the participant produced a response more aligned to sexuality or gender or both. Next,
a deeper analysis of the data occurred in order to establish categories. Observations included the
first two weeks of the study as well as an analysis of the video recordings of the critical readings
which recorded participant events before, during, and after the readings.
Artifact Collection
Student produced artifacts included weekly critical literacy drawings as well as
photographs captured outside the research site. After each reading, participants drew a picture
about what they thought the author or illustrator wanted the reader to remember the most about
the book. Each participant described the drawing to the researcher which was recorded on the
back of each drawing. Critical literacy drawings were analyzed according to whether the
participant depicted the theme of book (i.e., relating to gender or sexuality or both) in the
drawing or not. Weekly charts were made which charted the drawings of each participant.
Charting the drawings according to the book allowed me analyze whether a particular book

78

evoked an overall positive or negative response toward critical readings of sexuality and gender
in the participants. Additionally, charting each drawing allowed me to analyze the participants’
responses according to the weekly theme of gender or sexuality. For instance, I was able to
analyze if participants resisted one representation over another, such as resisting diverse gender
representations more than alternative sexual representations.
Researcher Reflective Journal
Data pertaining to the researcher as teacher was analyzed independently to describe the
possible implementation of critical literacy and the ways in which a teacher might face
uncomfortable situations, such as challenging questions or comments from the young
participants. All data collected in the research journal was compared to the teacher-researcher
data transcribed and charted from the video recordings. I analyzed and compared my teaching
practices implemented in the classroom and captured on video recording to my reflections in the
research journal. Reflections of the researcher assuming the role as teacher were analyzed for
comments which referenced the ways I obtained the participants’ attention and used critical
literacy to keep participants engaged and focused on sexuality and gender.
Data Analysis Summary and Charts
In analyzing the data for codes and categories to emerge in relation to sexuality and
gender within the context of critical readings, the process was divided into three stages. These
stages occurred simultaneously for both the teacher and the student participants. In the first stage,
I relied on a qualitative approach by inductively analyzing both the student and teacher data
(Bodgan & Biklen, 2007). Data was analyzed for comments that reflected not only critical
literacy and queer theory in action but also how the children and teacher responded to the diverse
representations of sexuality and gender in the selected literature. For instance, comments about

79

sexuality (e.g., same-sex relationships) or gender (e.g., unconventional gender expressions) were
noted in the individual charts across each observation. Charting the data served two purposes.
First, charting provided a comprehensive snapshot of each participant in relation to sexuality and
gender as well as to the application of critical literacy. Second, individually charting the
participants’ responses aided in the process of collectively comparing or contrasting the
participants’ data. Figure 3.2 provides a visual of student data was charted in the first stage of the
process.
Figure 3.2 Sexuality and Gender Chart
Codes
Sexuality

Gender

Data
“A Tale of Two Dads, it’s about dads like X and X” – Tale of Two Dads
“the kings got married”- King & King & Family
“Every King gets married”- King & King & Family
“the princess boy and the boy love each other”- Princess Boy
Mother, Father, and little girl- Pre- assessment Drawing
“it’s a girl story and I don’t like it” – Olivia and The Fairy Princess
“there are no girl colors or boy colors” – The Princess Boy
“I’m going to draw them all grown and they are boys”- The White Swan Express
Changes sex of girl character to boy- Critical Drawing- Tale of Two Daddies
Alters sex of girl characters to boys- Critical Drawing- The White Swan Express

In the second stage and guided by the research questions, I utilized qualitative open
coding procedures (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) to establish categories. Data which supported these
categories included when participants aligned to the story during storytime and made personal
connections to the topic. Another example included when participants recreated or remade
certain aspects about the book, by altering a character or changing the storyline to their liking.
Finally, the third example occurred when participants rejected the stories by not making any
connection to the book by drawing or responding off topic to the critical literacy prompts.

80

Charts were used to code the students’ responses, meaning was provided for each response to
indicate why the response was coded in that particular category. Figure 3.3 includes a visual to
illustrate how this process took place.
Figure 3.3 Student Response Chart
Categories

Student Rejects

Student Replicates

Student Recreates

Meaning
Princess Smartypants- Page rejects the
idea that Princess might not want to marry
and views the refusal as offensive. This
perspective demonstrates that Page
upholds the societal view that a princess
should marry a prince.

Data
Teacher: Does she want to
marry a prince or not marry a
prince?
Page: Not marry one
Teacher: What do you think
about that?
Page: Rude

My Princess Boy- Page is replicating the
main character by putting herself in a
similar position as the Princess boy and
acknowledging the feeling of being
ridiculed for defying the conventional
norms.

Page: Sometimes I dress up
like a boy and people laugh at
me and my clothes

The Boy with Pink Hair- After reading a
book about a boy with pink hair, Page
comments about her families’ hair and its
uniqueness.

Page: “My grandpa, his hair is
dyed brown and my
grandmother’s hair is afro.

In the third stage, I analyzed the data according to the categories in order to identity
themes (Richards & Morse, 2007). Data was coded according to participant responses thereby
producing the theme: Critical Literacy in Action toward Sexuality and Gender Produces 3
Student Responses. Data focused on the researcher serving as teacher produced two categories
thereby producing the theme: Two ways to Enact Critical Literacy with Young Children using
LGBTQ-themed literature. Figure 3.4 provides a snapshot of how the data was processed in the
third stage in order to identify themes using the categories generated in the data.

81

Figure 3.4 Identify Themes
Theme

Critical Literacy in Action:
Sexuality

Critical Literacy in Action:
Gender

Meaning
Through discussion and
classroom acknowledgement
that some people may prefer to
remain single. After providing
Page with a representation in
which a Princess finds more
happiness being singe, Page
verbalizes that not all
princesses should feel
compelled to marry a prince.

Data
Initial: Princess Smarty Pants
Page: Not marry one
Teacher: What do you think
about that?
Page: Rude
Transformative: The Paper
Bag Princess
Page: She was alone; some
people don’t want to marry.

Through discussion and
classroom acknowledgement
that some people connect to
another gender choice, Jerry
illustrates transformative
thinking. This transformation
is supported by his first
drawing in which he draws a
princess boy slashed to his
final drawing of depicting an
effeminate boy in the final
story of 10,000 Dresses as is.

Initial: My Princess Boy
Jerry’s Critical Drawing: The
Princess Boy with lacerations
wounds from other people
Transformative Thinking:
10,000 Dresses
Depicting the main character,
Bailey, as is in the book,
wearing a crystal dress.

In sum, after coding the data into sexuality or gender, three categories emerged producing
two overall themes which spoke to the research question of how students respond to LGBTQthemed books using critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender. In the next chapter, I
discuss these three categories in detail and present the findings of the overall study as well as
highlight the findings of the individual case studies.

82

Chapter 4
Case Study Findings
This chapter includes the four individual case studies in relation to the research question:
How do young children respond to critical readings of LGBTQ-themed children’s literature and
in turn to the topic of sexuality and gender? To answer this question, three focal participants out
of five were selected for in-depth discussion. The three participants studied met the criteria of
having a unique family structure, had solid verbal skills, and demonstrated a desire to participate
on data collection days. Reports on the individual participants are organized according to (a) the
data source and (b) the pattern of responses that emerged from each participant. Overall, the
three major types of responses generated by the focal participants across the various data sources
and discussed are: (1) Student Rejects, which included when a participant refused to make any
connections to the main character or the author’s purpose of the book, (2) Student Replicates,
which occurred when the participant replicated the main character or the author’s purpose of the
book, or (3) Student Recreates, which involved when the participant altered the main character or
author’s purpose of the book to his or her liking. The labeling of these responses—Student
Rejects, Student Replicates, or Student Recreates —are unique to this study in that they were
created by the researcher and not inspired from any previous study.
Responses were examined regarding how the participants’ comments aligned to critical
literacy, sexuality and gender, or both. To fully examine the complexity of my first research
question, it was imperative to recognize elements in the data which addressed critical literacy
and sexuality or gender as well as to spotlight critical literacy in action toward sexuality and
gender. In some instances, responses aligned to both critical literacy and sexuality and gender,
and thus were examined as such. In general, responses were examined in their totality, meaning

83

unsolicited responses were coded with the same importance as solicited responses. Solicited
responses included implementing Vasquez’s (2004, 2010) critical questions while unsolicited
responses were those in which the participants voluntarily shared their thoughts throughout the
reading or during our critical discussions which occurred at the conclusion of each book.
The final case study in this chapter reports on the researcher serving as the teacher. This
case study examines the data in relation to the second research question: How is critical literacy
with a focus on sexuality and gender enacted by the researcher assuming the role as teacher?
This last case study is organized according to the data sources as well as to my dual position as a
teacher and a researcher. In order to examine the complexity of the second question, it was
equally imperative to recognize elements of the data that addressed my dual position in relation
to both implementing critical literacy and to the integration over the topic of sexuality and
gender.
Case 1: Page
Background
Page is an African-American girl in kindergarten being raised by her divorced mother
and father who live in separate households. Page does not have any siblings, but shared many
stories about her extended family members. She was the only girl in the study, but positioned
herself as an equal by participating as much as, if not more than, the boys. She was very
observant and would often vocalize how the boy participants would agree with her viewpoints.
Page tended to answer my questions first while offering very detailed responses. For instance,
when asking Page to make a prediction about the book, Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986)
which portrays a princess and a dragon riding a motorcycle on the cover, Page stated: “It’s about
a little princess with a dragon and she was being a smartypants cause she thought she knew how

84

to ride a motorcycle but she didn’t.” Due to Page’s eloquent responses, on occasion, the boys
would respond, “I agree with Page,” prompting her to evaluate the situation and proclaim:
“Everyone agrees with me?” Over the course of the study, Page posed several questions and was
equally eager to answer all of mine. Near the conclusion of the study, Page began to assert her
ethnic difference by including African-American characteristics in the drawings as well as make
comments referring to her cultural heritage. Table 4.1 below provides an overview of Page’s
responses across the data sources which are discussed below.
Table 4.1
Data Collection for Page
Rejects
Replicates
Recreates
______________________________________________________________________________
Transcripts
6 (LGBTQ)
14 (LGBTQ)
17 (LGBTQ)
Critical Literacy Drawings

2 (LGBTQ)

6 (LGBTQ)

3 (LGBTQ)

Photographs

6 (Traditional)

8 (Traditional)

N/A

Pre- & Post Assessment
Pre (Traditional)
Post (Traditional)
______________________________________________________________________________
Note. Transcripts and Critical Literacy Drawings were analyzed as to whether Page rejected,
replicated, or recreated LGBTQ-themed representations. In contrast, the photographs as well as
the pre- and post-assessment drawings were analyzed as to whether Page rejected, replicated or
recreated traditional sexuality and gender representations.
Transcripts
Coding the transcripts included examining both Page’s solicited and unsolicited
responses to the critical reading sessions. Both responses were equally important to examine as
they expressed Page’s perspective about sexuality and gender. Additionally, by asking critical
questions about each book, the teacher and the participants constructed an environment in which
all critical inquiries were welcomed and often occurred spontaneously. The following sections
are divided according to the three types of responses: student rejects, student replicates, and
85

student recreates. The final section spotlights critical literacy in action in which Page’s initial
verbal responses shifted from one reading to another and, as a result, transformative thinking
took place.
Student Rejects. Page was a very demonstrative student who asked several questions
and sought to answer those posed by the teacher. In some cases, if Page’s perspective of the
world did not align to the book, she willingly shared her viewpoint. For instance, when reading
The Family Book (Parr, 2010), a book about different families which states, “all families like to
hug,” Page quickly interjected, “some families don’t.” In this sense, Page used the critical
readings to voice her opposition to the book’s view about hugs. Since participants were
frequently asked to share their predictions and thoughts about why the author would write the
book, Page felt comfortable in equally sharing her contradictory views about not all families
liking to hug and, more importantly, that not all families participate in the same activities.
The participants would at times offer perspectives that would communicate their ideas or
beliefs about sexuality and gender as well. Such insights allowed the teacher to consider these
perspectives when reading the LGBTQ-themed books. For instance, when reading a story about
a princess who diverts male suitors from marrying her, the following exchange occurred between
the teacher and Page.
Teacher: Does she want to marry a prince or not marry a prince?
Page: Not marry one
Teacher: What do you think about that?
Page: Rude
In this scenario, Page rejects the notion that the Princess might not want to marry and instead
views the Princess’s refusal as offensive. Page did not consider how it might be “rude” to force a

86

Princess into marrying who wishes to remain single. This perspective demonstrates that Page
was upholding the societal pressure of a Princess needing to marry a Prince in a superior position
versus considering the Princess’s viewpoint. When the Princess refuses to conform to the
stereotypical imagine, Page considered the Princess ill-mannered.
Student Replicates. In relation to sexuality and gender, Page tended to replicate the main
character or the author’s purpose. For instance, after reading My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010)
which portrays a boy who enjoys dressing up like a princess, Page stated, “sometimes I dress up
like a boy and people laugh at me and my clothes”. In this sense, Page replicated the main
character by putting herself in a similar position as the Princess boy, and acknowledged the
feeling of being ridiculed when one wears clothes outside of the conventional norms. Another
example of Page replicating the main character in this same book occurred when Page answers
the critical question: What are 1 or 2 things from your own life that connect to these stories?
Page made a direct connection to the main character in the book by stating, “Me and that boy
both like to twirl and wear girly things.” Page focused on the shared actions that both she and the
Princess Boy enjoy and was not swayed by the fact that she was born as a girl and the Princess
Boy was not.
Page replicates a similar response in reading Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011). This
story is about a boy who is excited to be the ring bearer for his two moms who are getting
married. During the story, the following exchange occurred.
Teacher: He has two moms.
Page: I have one mom.
Another participant: I have one mom, too.
Page: I might have another mom in China, but I don’t know.

87

Page is demonstrating her acceptance over the possibility of having two moms by placing herself
in that position. Although Page is being raised by a mother and a father, Page replicates the main
character’s position by suggesting that she might have a second mother as well.
Lastly, after reading a book about two married kings who wish to have a child, Page uses
critical literacy to state that the author might have written the book to illustrate how the two
kings are proud of their family: “I think he [the author] wrote it because he [the author] is a king
and he likes his family.” Page replicates the author’s purpose of the story and uses critical
literacy to pinpoint the purpose of acceptance toward alternative families.
Student Recreates. In comparison to Page rejecting or replicating the author’s
viewpoints of the books, Page often recreated elements of the book’s critical message or
character in order to interject her ways of viewing the world. For instance, after reading a book
which portrays a two mom family with a little girl named Emma who plays with a cat in
unconventional ways, Page stated her belief that the author’s purpose for this book was not to
represent a family with two moms, but instead to demonstrate how to treat pets properly. Page
responds that “some people have pets and should know how to treat them”. In asking Page what
surprised her about the book, she responds, “The thing that surprised me is when Emma painted
the cat brown.” Page uses critical literacy to spotlight animal rights. In this sense, Page has
recreated the critical lesson of the book by placing a higher importance on animal rights than a
family with two moms.
Unlike the other participants, Page was the only African-American girl in the study and
often used critical literacy to recreate the purpose or main character to align with her own
cultural background. This type of response became more apparent in the critical drawings but a
few instances occurred throughout our discussions. For instance, after reading, The Boy with

88

Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011) which portrays a boy born with pink hair, Page’s states: “My grandpa,
his hair is dyed brown, and my grandmother’s hair is afro.” Discussing the unusual circumstance
of having pink hair and reading a book that celebrated this difference caused Page to comment
about her families’ hair and its uniqueness. Another example of Page using critical literacy to
recreate the message of a book occurred after reading a story in which two moms get married.
The purpose of the book, Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011), was to demonstrate the different
types of families. At the conclusion of the book, Page comments how the two moms are
marrying, but that her mother and father are not. Since Page comes from a divorced family, she
used critical literacy in this case to redirect the attention off the marriage of the two women and
place it on the separation of her parents. Although critical literacy allowed Page to visualize the
marriage of two women and to discuss it in the classroom, she recreated the theme to align it to
her own family and thus possibly heteronormativity.
Critical Literacy toward Sexuality and Gender in Action. Given that the study’s focus
was to use the tenets of critical literacy which requires action or transformative thinking to occur
in relation to sexuality and gender, this section serves as a model to demonstrate how a student
who is comparable to Page might similarly respond. In comparison to the above sections, Page
either replicated or recreated the author’s purpose or main character of the book. There were
certain incidents in which participants would shift from one response to another and in this sense
transformative thinking occurred. One example of Page recreating the author’s purpose or the
main character took place when reading Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986). In this book, a
princess who does not want to marry a prince requires her suitors to perform treacherous and
impossible tasks in which they inevitably fail. After asking Page why she thought the author
wrote the book, Page responds, “So we can know how mean it is to test people, so you won’t get

89

married.” Page focuses more on the challenges that the suitors were forced to face rather than on
the princess who was resisting the societal pressure placed on her to marry a prince. Through
discussion and classroom acknowledgement that some people may prefer being single, Page, in a
later session, replicates the author’s purpose of the book when asked: “Remember Princess
Smartypants? Why do you think the author wrote this book?” Page fervently responds, “because
some people don’t want to get married.” In this sense, critical discussions allowed Page to first
acknowledge what she believed the author’s focal point of the first book was, which dealt with
being rude and testing people, but then, and more importantly, to expand her views and to
consider that not everyone wishes to be married. As a result, Page replicates this expanded
viewpoint after reading a similar second book, The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995), in
which a Princess at the end of the story decides not to marry the Prince.
Teacher: What happens in this book? (holding up The Paper Bag Princess)
Page: She was alone, some people don’t want to marry.
After offering Page a representation in which a Princess finds more happiness in being single,
through reading Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), Page replicates this theme and does not push
back when a similar theme is proposed in the second book: The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch,
1995). Critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender not only offered Page alternate
representations regarding diverse gender roles, but also transformed Page’s way of thinking by
realizing that not every Princess seeks a Prince.
Another example of critical literacy in action occurred when reading A Tale of Two
Daddies (Oelschalger, 2010) in which two daddies demonstrate the ways in which they take care
of their young daughter. During the reading, the focus is placed on the daughter having two
fathers to such a degree that the daughter in the story is not given a name. At one point, Page

90

stands up demanding the name of the girl by hastily stating: “What is the girl’s name?” The
teacher explains that we do not know the name of the girl because the focus of the book is placed
on the girl having two fathers, unlike most books that portray a mother and a father. Page accepts
the response and the story is concluded. The following week during a review of previous books
read, the teacher asks: “Who did we read about last week?” Page quickly responds “the daddies”.
This response demonstrates that Page had shifted her focus of the little girl to the understanding
the role that the fathers played in the story.
Critical Literacy Drawings
The instructions involved with the critical literacy drawings consisted of asking
participants to draw what they thought the author or illustrator wanted them to remember the
most about the book. Since the critical drawings occurred after the critical discussions took place
and involved discussing various interpretations about the overall purpose of the book, critical
drawings were evaluated based on whether the weekly drawing related to the general theme of
the book or about the main character. The following parameters were set in order to ensure
consistence in coding all drawings across participants. A picture was labeled as Student Rejects,
if a participant drew a picture unrelated to the theme of the book, and thus the author’s purpose
or to the main character. If the student recreated certain elements of the book by changing the
author’s purpose or the main character, the drawing was labeled as Student Recreates. A picture
was classified as Student Replicates, if the student depicted the author’s purpose or replicated the
character according to the author’s creation. Similar to the transcripts, Page demonstrated all
three responses in her drawings.
Student Rejects. Out of the eleven drawing assignments, two drawings were coded into
this category. The fifth book read during the study, King & King & Family (de Haan and Nijland,

91

2004), portrayed two kings traveling on their honeymoon who returned home to discover their
soon-to-be adopted daughter in their suitcase. This was the first book in the study which
portrayed two fathers and a child as a family. In her critical literacy drawing, Page redirects
attention off the two Kings and in its place depicts only one King who is disturbed by an
annoying mosquito. Instead of focusing on the main theme, which was an alternative family, or
depicting both Kings with the child, Page affirms her views of the story by representing another
element in the story. Page’s drawing was influenced by a part in the story in which one of the
Kings is stung by a mosquito. When asked to draw what she thought the author or illustrated
wanted her to remember the most about the book, Page omits the alternative family
representation as well as the same-sex relationship by not depicting the two men in unison in her
picture.
Page exhibits this same response in another critical literacy drawing when reading a
second book about two fathers. The book, A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschlager, 2010), portrays
two white fathers taking care of their young white daughter. The ethnicity of these
representations is provided in order to compare and contrast Page’s response to the first book in
the series with two fathers, King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004) which also offers
portrayals of two white fathers adopting a daughter who could be viewed as Latina, AfricanAmerican, Indian or a child with olive skin. As in the first book, Page rejected both fathers’ roles
as well as the daughter’s in the second book by drawing a picture of a boy who stumbles and
bruises his knee (see appendix A). Her drawing is in reference to an illustration in the book, A
Tale of Two Daddies, which shows a friend of the girl’s, a young boy, falling and getting hurt. In
the illustration, the boy asks the girl which father takes care of her when she injures herself.
Page’s critical drawing does not include any of the main characters nor does it reflect the

92

author’s purpose which is about alternative families. Page’s decision to not depict the fathers
occurred after having an explicit conversation about how the author of this book, A Tale of Two
Daddies, similar to the book, King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004) also does not
provide a name for all of the characters, since the primary focus is on having two fathers. Her
choice to concentrate on another element of the book in her drawing allowed Page to assert
herself and her choice to reject the critical reading about alternative families and in particular
two fathers. This data also demonstrates that Page tended to reject texts which did provide names
for its characters as was the case for both these books.
Student Replicates. Out of the eleven critical drawings, Page produced six that were
coded into this category. Overall, Page replicated the author’s purpose about alternative families
as well as books about gender differences. After reading a book about alternative families in
which Page rejected some of the author’s view, she replicates a similar illustration in the book by
connecting it to her family. For instance, while reading The Family Book (Parr, 2010) Page
overtly contrasts the author’s views that all families like to hug by stating that her family does
not. Page felt that the most important element of the book was that not all families live in the
same house. Since the book focuses on how families are different, it is not surprising that Page
chose to replicate this illustration for critical literacy picture given that she lives in two separate
houses (see Appendix B). Although this depiction does not include a same-sex parent
representation, it does consist of elements that were central to the book’s purpose in that it
demonstrates the different family structures. The second drawing is for the book, The White
Swan Express: A Story about Adoption (Okimoto & Aoki, 2002) which also includes alternative
family representations. The book is about different families who travel to China to adopt infant
girls. For this picture, Page draws an infant yelling out to her mother. Page’s drawing

93

demonstrates how she viewed the infant finding her new mother as a central theme versus the
various families represented. Alternatively, her drawing also suggests that the child is the
essential character and not the sexuality of those who love him or her. Her drawing is most likely
influenced by a comparable imagine in the book which depicts several families sitting in a room
waiting to be placed with newly adopted daughter.
The last four drawings incorporate themes related to gender expression. Three books
depict young boys who do not subscribe to the typical conventional roles. In comparison to The
Family Book (Parr, 2010), Page draws a picture that is similar to an illustration in My Princess
Boy (Kilodavis, 2010). Page draws the Princess Boy, the main character, twirling and happy
because no one is laughing at him (see Appendix C). Her critical drawing aligns to the weekly
critical question in which she responded, “Me and the boy [Princess Boy] both like to twirl and
wear girly thing.” This representation was likewise repeated in her drawing for 10,000 Dresses
(Ewert, 2008) in which the main character, Bailey, born as a boy, but identities as a girl, is drawn
wearing a crystal dress and happily dancing in a dress (see Appendix D). The theme of boys
being mocked for expressing themselves differently appeared to resonate with Page, as it
reappeared after reading The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011). For this critical literacy
drawing, Page portrayed the main character, the boy with pink hair, being ridiculed by another
boy in the story (see Appendix E). Page tended to empathize with boys who embraced bodily
performances and garments generally associated with young girls.
On the flip side, Page initially resisted portrayals of females who did not conform to
stereotypical representations. For instance, during the reading of Princess Smartypants (Cole,
1986) Page recreates the theme by placing the focus on the prince versus the Princess. She views
the Prince as being rude and fails to recognize the choice of the Princess who seeks her freedom

94

from the constraints of matrimony. Her critical literacy drawing depicts a similar illustration in
the book in which one suitor seeking the Princess is transformed into a toad. There are two
possible interpretations for Page’s drawing. First, the princess is performing an impolite action
by altering the Prince into a frog; or second, the princess has acquired her independence by
transforming the only viable Prince into a toad. Since Page’s drawing includes the main
character performing an act which grants her autonomy, this drawing was labeled as: Student
Replicates. Page’s resistance toward females who refuse to embrace conventional roles
decreased over the course of the study.
Student Recreates. Under this category, Page produced three drawings. The drawings
displayed the quality of recreation in that her drawings presented a change either in the theme of
the book as well as an alteration of the main character. Overall, Page altered the characteristics of
the main characters in all of her drawings as well as changed the author’s purpose in one. For
instance, after reading Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two Mom Story (Considine, 2005), a book
about two moms and a daughter named Emma who plays with her cat, Meesha, in unusual ways,
Page places greater concentration on the cat’s family versus the two mothers or their daughter.
Her critical literacy drawing depicts a cat with two brown painted spots (see Appendix F). This
drawing was most likely influenced by an illustration in the book in which Emma paints the cat.
Page portrayed the cat to be black although it was gray in the story. Page not only altered the
characteristics of the cat, but also only drew the cat. Her decision to depict simply the cat
supports her viewpoint about the main theme of the book. In her verbal response to why the
author wrote this book, Page highlighted the treatment of animals rather than the alternative
family of two mothers. In sum, she recreated the author’s purpose as well as changed a
characteristic of the cat in the book in her critical literacy drawing.

95

Altering some aspect of the main character occurred frequently in Page’s drawings. After
reading The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995) and Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011), Page
transformed the characters by recreating them with African-American traits. Conversely, Page
did not recreate, but in fact replicated the African-American characters proposed in the LGBTQthemed books. In looking at how Page transformed the characters, Page not only altered the light
skin princess in the book, The Paper Bag Princess, by adding African-American hair, but also
provided this same transformation to the dragon by outlining the dragon’s scales in brown (see
Appendix G). Page described this picture as “the Princess with afro and dragon puffed out hair.”
In Donovan’s Big Day, a story about a white boy, Page recreates the main character, the boy, by
making his hands and feet brown in the story (see Appendix H). It is unclear as to why only his
hands and feet are brown; however, this is the second instance in which Page interjects the color
brown onto a character. The first occasion occurred in Emma and Meesha My Boy (Considine,
2005) in which the color of the cat changed to brown. Considering the various modifications
ranging from inserting African-American hair traits to inserting the color brown onto the various
light on the absence of many African-American families in children’s literature.
Critical Literacy toward Sexuality and Gender in Action. Critical literacy occurred in
various ways with this type of data source. Unlike the transcript data about families with two
fathers or a family with two mothers, Page asserted her views about families with two fathers by
not only failing to represent these roles in her critical literacy drawing, but also to ignoring the
author’s purpose of the book by drawing a King getting bitten by a mosquito. Second, although
Page initially resisted the idea of a Princess being single in the transcript data, she does in fact
replicate the main theme of the book, Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), in her drawing. This

96

drawing indicates a movement from initially understanding that some women do not seek to
marry a prince.
Another way in which Page demonstrated critical literacy through her drawings was to
insert her own cultural heritage into three of the pictures. Although this insertion is not in line
with sexuality and gender, it does suggest that Page felt comfortable in critically examining
books and in turn used this knowledge to include elements which were important to her.
Discussions involving which representations were present and why allowed Page to evaluate
books in relation to what she would like to see represented. Page’s critical literacy drawings
began to contain African-American elements around the eighth week and beyond.
Photographs and Pre- and Post-Assessment
In analyzing the photographs, only two categories applied, Student Reject or Student
Replicates, as participants were not able to recreate or alter photographs. Participant photographs
that rejected traditional roles in relation to sexuality or gender were labeled as: Student Rejects.
For instance, photographs of books, movies, or characters that defied nontraditional gender and
sexuality roles were coded into this category. In contrast, photographs that portrayed
conventional roles in keeping with sexuality or gender were coded as: Student Replicates. The
third category, Student Recreates, was not utilized given that no initial data source was used in
order to suggest that the student “recreated” a particular product or character. Out of the twentyfour photographs that Page captured, eight were coded as Student Replicates. Six photographs
were coded as Student Rejects and ten photographs were not included due to blurriness of
pictures or redundancy of the same book or character.
Unlike the participant photographs, the pre- and post-assessment pieces were analyzed
according to all three categories: Student Rejects, Student Replicates, and Student Recreates. The

97

assessment pieces were evaluated on whether there was change from the first drawing to the
second. By analyzing the photographs and the pre- and post- assessment pieces as a
comprehensive data set, Page produced responses in each category.
Student Rejects. Page captured six pictures of books, DVDs, or characters which did not
portray stereotypical roles of men and women in relation to gender and sexuality. For example,
photographs which did not capture a heterosexual family structure or have a boy or girl
conveying to traditional gender roles were coded as student rejects. The next section discusses
the pictures in which Page took.
Two pictures portrayed books about boys who are very clever about getting what they
desire. For instance, one book, What! Cried Granny: An Almost Bedtime Story (Lum, 2002), is
about a boy who circumvents his grandmother by giving her multiple tasks in order to avoid
sleeping. The second book, David Gets in Trouble (Shannon, 2002), is about a boy who refuses
to take the blame for his actions and conveniently places the guilt onto others. One book portrays
a friendly witch who is saved by her animal friends when taken by a hungry dragon. This book,
Room on the Broom, (Donaldson, 2003) offers another perspective of a woman in that the main
character is not juxtaposed against a heroic male figure nor is she adorned in typical female garb.
One of the books was an expository text about the rain forest and one was a Dr. Seuss book,
Happy Birthday to You! (Dr. Seuss, 2003) about celebrating a birthday. The final book, Fun to
Learn: Opposites (Filipek, 2006) portrayed an African-American girl and a White boy along
with other opposites. This book was an educational text concerned with demonstrating opposites
and did not supply a story or representations related to sexuality and gender.
Student Replicates. Page took eight photographs that replicated the traditional roles of
men and women in relation to sexuality and gender. In each of these pictures, Page captured

98

either a picture of a young girl or a Princess. Three of the pictures include a young girl under the
age of ten as the main character. One book, Fancy Nancy and the Posh Puppy (O’Conner, 2013),
is about a girl who wants a dog. Although Nancy has a very robust vocabulary and is intelligent,
she also often wears tutus and tiara. The next books, I Love to Sing (Matheson, 2014) and I’m a
Pretty Little Black Girl (Bynum & Parod, 2013) equally portray girls dressing and performing
activities associated with girls. For instance, the main characters like to sing, to dance, and to
twirl and primarily wear pink garments throughout the books.
The remaining five texts portray older females seeking or being courted into male
companionship. Four of the females in the texts are princesses: Barbie Fairytopia: Mermaidia
(2012), The Frog Prince (2009), Frozen (2013) and The Princess and the Frog (2009). Each of
these texts contains a princess who adorns herself in ways typical of a princess and who desires
to fall in love with a prince. Although some of the texts, such as Frozen, portray a Queen who
does not seek to be married, the Queen is described as one who possess uncontrollable special
powers and ultimately secludes herself into a self-imposed isolation, while her sister, the
delightful princess, rescues her with the assistance of male companion.
The final photograph in this category is of the text Cloudy with a chance of Meatballs
(2009) which contains a nerdy male and geeky female who begin to care for each other while
saving the world against a cloudburst of provisions.
Student Recreates. The pre- and post-assessment asked students to draw a character they
would like to see in a book. For the pre-assessment, Page drew a picture of Snow White which
suggested that Page had been conditioned by societal representations to produce a White
character attracted to a heterosexual counterpart. Given that the prompt was to draw a self-made
character, Page’s drawing equally suggests that she had most likely been exposed to White

99

characters as she was unable to produce other nonconventional characters. Over the course of the
study, participants were challenged to consider why the author would create alternative
representations and to reflect on whose voices were omitted from texts in general. For the postassessment, Page drew a picture of a brown potato head with African-American hair to which
she called “afro puff.” Her post-assessment drawing not only suggests that Page began to
consider other characters outside of the conventional norms, but also felt comfortable in the
critical literacy environment to construct an alternative character that resonated with her
experiences.
Critical literacy toward Sexuality or Gender in Action. The best example of critical
literacy in action toward sexuality and gender according to this data set is the change from the
pre- and post-assessment. Page’s pre-assessment picture indicates that she was unable to conjure
up different images of characters than those primarily found in children’s textbooks: White
females adorned in stereotypical garb and attracted to the opposite sex. Page’s post-assessment
drawing offers a different perspective in that she drew Ms. Potato head with African-American
hair. Page’s post-assessment drawing suggests a movement of power on her behalf by illustrating
a character with similar skin color and hair. It is impossible to determine with accuracy whether
the exposure of various alternative representations prompted Page to depict a non-stereotypical
character in the post-assessment, but such a change suggests that it was likely.
Summary
The findings regarding Page’s responses across the data sources indicate that critical
literacy in action took place and, as a result, transformative thinking occurred in the areas of both
sexuality and gender. Data highlighted how Page initially resisted the concept of females, and in
particular Princesses, choosing to be single, but altered her thinking by acknowledging that not

100

everyone seeks companionship of the opposite sex. Another way in which critical literacy took
place was by Page becoming aware that not all females depicted in texts must act and dress in
conventional ways. For instance, Page‘s post assessment drawing of Ms. Potato head rejects the
traditional representation of females commonly depicted in books and is significantly different
than her pre-assessment illustration of Snow White. The final way in which critical literacy
occurred was Page’s insertion of her own cultural heritage by transforming the characters to have
African-American hair or brown skin color. Page’s tendency to insert her cultural heritage
increased over the course of the study and became more apparent near the end.
Overall, Page’s case study demonstrates how implementing critical literacy by reading
alternative books over the course of fifteen weeks caused Page to reflect in various ways. Page
reflected about the overabundant representations readily available, particularly in terms of
marriage, the ways in which both boys and girls are depicted in books, as well as the need to see
her own cultural heritage embodied in children’s books.
Case 2: Jerry
Background
Jerry, a middle child, raised in a heterosexual home environment and in first grade, easily
shared his thoughts throughout the course of the study. Starting with the first day of the study,
while reading The Family Book (Parr, 2010), Jerry interjected his opinion by stating, “My
favorite word is other and I love pets.” Since this book focuses on various family structures and
uses animal characters to portray various family structures, it appears that the reading of this
book influenced Jerry’s comment. He was the most demonstrative boy including the boy
participants eliminated from the study. His demonstrative personality may stem from being
raised in household with two other brothers. Although Jerry expressed his thoughts and concerns

101

with ease, he also searched for teacher approval and responded well to structure. For instance,
prior to reading each book, the teacher asked the participants to make a prediction based on the
cover of the book. Before reading My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010), Jerry believed that we had
missed a step and hastily stood up proclaiming, “We have to guess what it will be about.” Jerry’s
desire to obtain the correct answer consumed his mind during the readings by evaluating the
predictions made to the actual events of the story. Predictions that did not coincide with the
participants’ responses often led Jerry to acknowledge the error; for example, Jerry would state,
“we were wrong” or “I was wrong.” Table 4.2 provides an overview of Jerry’s responses across
the data sources which are further discussed below.
Table 4.2
Data Collection for Jerry
Rejects
Replicates
Recreates
______________________________________________________________________________
Transcripts
8 (LGBTQ)
9 (LGBTQ)
12 (LGBTQ)
Critical Literacy Drawings

3 (LGBTQ)

6 (LGBTQ)

2 (LGBTQ)

Photographs

8 (Traditional)

8 (Traditional)

N/A

Pre- & Post Assessment
Pre (Traditional)
Post (Traditional)
______________________________________________________________________________
Note. Transcripts and Critical Literacy Drawings were analyzed as to whether Jerry rejected,
replicated, or recreated LGBTQ-themed representations. In contrast, the photographs as well as
the pre- and post-assessment drawings were analyzed as to whether Jerry rejected, replicated or
recreated traditional sexuality and gender representations.
Transcripts
Similar to Page, Jerry’s solicited and unsolicited responses were coded during the critical
reading sessions. Jerry offered multiple perspectives through voluntarily sharing his concerns as
well as when prompted to reflect on a particular question. By asking critical literacy questions
during each reading, the teacher and the participants constructed a welcoming environment in
102

which various inquiries occurred spontaneously. Sections are divided according to the three
types of responses: student rejects, student replicates, and student recreates. The final section
discusses critical literacy in action which examines how verbal responses shifted from one
reading to another suggesting that transformative thinking had occurred.
Student Rejects. Jerry expressed the most opposition in relation to gender and, more
specifically, concerning girls, their clothing, or behavior (e.g., dresses or twirling). After reading
Olivia and the Fairy Princess (Falconer, 2012), the teacher asked whether we should or should
not read this book. Jerry responded, “Should not because, she is a girl and I don’t like girls.” The
teacher then followed this line of thinking with, “Do you think this book is just for girls?” to
which Jerry confirmed, “yes.” Jerry’s resistance to widen his views about gender, surfaced once
more when reading My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010) however in this case, Jerry shared why
people generally mock boys like the main character, the Princess Boy, in this book.
Page: But how come they laugh at him?
Jerry: Can I tell her?
Teacher: What do you think the reason is?
Jerry: They will laugh at him because when they see boys with girl’s stuff, they think the
boy wants to wear it.
Jerry, at the age of six, has realized that boys are expected to conform to particular roles by
acting and performing in certain ways. This conversation equally revealed that Page was not only
unaware of these expectations, but also surprised by the actions of others related to the boy’s
desire to wear dresses. At the conclusion of the book, the weekly critical question asked the
students to state what they have in common with the Princess Boy, a question to which Jerry
quickly responded, “nothing.” The teacher then directed the participants’ attention toward

103

focusing on the feelings of the Princess Boy and how it feels to be treated unkindly. When other
books are read with similar themes, Jerry does not resist the nonconventional gender role of boys
represented in the same manner.
Another instance in which Jerry rejected the author’s purpose and the characters of the
story occurred while reading The White Swan Express: A Story about Adoption (Okimoto &
Aoki, 2002). This story was about different families traveling to China to adopt infant girls. The
book portrayed several different types of families. Jerry directed the attention from the families
and the adoption process by asking multiple questions related to China: “Is China sometimes
sunny?”, “Are bicycles real there?” to “I thought those were Chinese words?” Jerry’s fascination
about China prevented him from making comments related to the author’s purpose of the book,
which was about different families and adoption.
Student Replicates. Jerry’s responses were higher in this category than in Student
Rejects and tended to replicate thoughts related to the main character or to the theme of the
books which represented various families. For instance, while reading the last page of The
Family Book (Parr, 2010): “Your family is special no matter what kind it is” (p. 29), which
caused Jerry to shout, “That’s just what I was going to say. I want a copy.” Jerry’s comments
illustrate that his viewpoints were similar to those of this book. Another instance, in which Jerry
supports alternative family roles, was when the class read Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two
Mom Story (Considine, 2005). When asking the participants why the author might have written
this book, Jerry responded, “two moms” and then voluntarily states, “people should read it”
which indicates that Jerry is assuming that this week’s critical literacy question is the same by
offering an answer in advance. The following week prior to reading a new book related to
gender, the teacher completes a mini-review of Emma and Meesha My Boy by asking the

104

participants why they think the author wrote this book. Jerry takes action by stating, “it has two
mommies.”
Although Jerry showed the most opposition toward male figures depicted in clothes
socially acceptable for girls, he did not demonstrate any verbal resistance toward two males
forming a family unit. For instance, the book King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004),
portrays two Kings vacationing on their honeymoon. The book introduces the Kings as just
getting married which causes the following conversation to occur between Page, Jerry, and the
teacher.
Page: The Kings got married?
Teacher: Yes
Jerry: Every King gets married
Jerry’s comment not only implies that he does not have any reservations about the two men
together, but also that he believes that every man should have a companion. This is an insightful
remark given that we discussed the week prior that not every Princess, and in turn everyone,
desires to be married. Before reading A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschlager, 2010), Jerry makes a
prediction about the book by looking at the cover and states, “I think the two dads like the sister,
I mean the kid, and likes the two dads.” Jerry’s comment shows that before reading the story he
can envision this family structure and does not demonstrate any resistance to its type. The final
example of Jerry embracing alternative families is when he makes a direct connection to a family
with two dads and the following conversation occurs.
Teacher reads: Which one [dad] makes your birthday cake? Who is the one who stays up
late? Yes, stays up late and tells stories
Jerry: My dad stays up late, he doesn’t tell me stories, but he just watches TV.

105

In this exchange, Jerry is comparing the dads and their actions to his father’s. At the conclusion
of the story, Jerry supports the answer of another participant when asked: Can you tell me one or
two people like the people in the story? One participant calls out: “Jenny and Cindy” who are
twin girls at the daycare center raised by two fathers; this response causes Jerry to become
frustrated and state, “He took my answer.” Overall, Jerry’s responses suggest that books with
two fathers resonated more with him than books with two mothers. This conclusion is made in
light of how Jerry voluntarily made personal connections to these books and willingly shared his
thoughts with stories which portrayed two fathers versus two mothers. In general, Jerry was more
receptive to the concept of alternative families than to the notion that boys could express
themselves in nontraditional ways, except in the realm of two men marrying.
Student Recreates. In comparison to the other two categories, Jerry produced the
highest amount of responses in this category. Jerry altered themes or main characters of books,
both of which pertained to sexuality and gender, by changing sentences read in books or the
appearance of certain characters. Regarding sexuality in terms of family structure, the following
conversation occurred.
Teacher reads: Some families have two moms or two dads. Some families have one
parent instead of two.
Jerry: Some people have three or more
This comment is worth noting in that Jerry does not resist the suggestion that some families have
two moms or two dads, but instead proposes that some families have three or more parents.
Given that Jerry is raised by a mother and a father who still live together, his comment implies
that he is familiar with various family structures and thought it significant to share his view about
how some are different.

106

Another situation in which Jerry recreated an element of a book occurred when reading
My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010). Before reading, Jerry assumes that this book will be like
King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004) in which two kings get married and find a
daughter on their honeymoon. When asked what he thinks the story might be about, Jerry
responds, “The princess boy and the boy love each other.” Jerry recreates the story by assuming
that the premise is a love story between the two boys. Jerry’s response may indicate a text-to-text
connection (Cochran-Smith, 1988) but it also demonstrates that Jerry made a connection to the
representation of two male characters in unison in that Jerry suggested this type of relationship
will take place in the book: My Princess Boy.
Although Jerry produced the greatest opposition to male figures adorned in stereotypical
garments, particularly when reading My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010), his perspective toward
similar books begins to shift by recreating certain elements of the book that make more sense to
him. For instance, before reading The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011), Jerry examines the
front cover of the book which portrays the boy with pink hair and shares: “I think the boy likes
having pink hair and he might have painted it, and he painted it to look like a girl.” Jerry has not
only taken the main character and created a reason as to why the boy has pink hair, but also
attached the reason to the boy seeking to be like the opposite sex. This comment demonstrates
growth in Jerry realizing that some boys may relate more with items typically associated with
girls. Another moment in which Jerry reveals that he is considering how people are categorized
and mocked by their gender occurs when he approaches the book, The Boy with Pink Hair,
points at the illustration of a girl with pink hair, and poses the following question.
Jerry: Why aren’t people laughing at her?
Teacher: That’s a good question. Why do you think that is?

107

Jerry: Because they laugh at boys with pink hair and not girls, because they think it’s a
girl color and think not all colors are boy colors.
Teacher: Do you think that is nice?
Jerry shakes his head to confirm that it is not a kind response.
Jerry redirects the attention away from the boy with pink hair, the main character, by inquiring
about a secondary character, a girl in the story with pink hair. In doing so, Jerry contemplates the
unfairness society places on boy and girls regarding color choices.
One book in particular, Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), caused Jerry to produce
several comments in which he recreated the main character or theme in order to make sense of
the actual story being told. The book portrays a Princess who expresses to her mother at the
beginning of the book that she does not wish to marry a Prince. The mother refuses to take note
of the Princess’s request and sends several suitors to her. The Princess feeling powerless concurs
with the mother but demands that the chosen suitor must be able to demonstrate his loyalty and
love by completing several challenging tasks. The wise Princess requires the suitors to perform
impossible tasks. All the men except one fall short in succeeding the Princesses’ tasks, the one
suitor that does succeed is transformed into a toad and hops away. At the end of the book, a
discussion occurs in which the teacher shares with the participants that not every Princess seeks a
Prince. In asking Jerry the critical literacy question for that week about what surprised him,
instead of noting that the Princess wished to be single; Jerry places the focus on prince by
stating: “When the prince did everything that Princess Smartypants told him to do.” This
comment shows that Jerry could not understand why the final suitor opted to take on the
additional obstacles posed by the Princess. In doing so, he recreates the main theme by
redirecting the main focus on the Prince versus the Princess.

108

Jerry’s struggle continues with the conclusion of this book and thus the Princess’ desire
to remain single which is expressed when he states: “I think Princess Smartypants wants not to
marry a prince because if she marries the prince then the magic spell, the kiss, will turn him into
a frog. Actually, maybe Princess Smartypants only likes pets.” Jerry’s first assessment about the
Princess’s decision to remain single is based on the premise that the Princess’s actions are acts of
kindness; and that she rejected the suitors because they would transform into toads once kissed.
Jerry’s final comment demonstrates that he is doubting his first line of reasoning and believes
that the Princess is happier in the company of animals. Jerry makes this conclusion in that the
Princess is portrayed at the end of the book with her dragon and other animals lying down next to
her.
Jerry’s confusion about why a Princess might not want to marry a Prince reappears when
reading The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995). The story is about a young princess who
wishes to marry Prince Ronald, but changes her mind at the end of the story once she realizes
that Prince Ronald is not a grateful person. In the story, Prince Ronald is taken by a dragon and
is rescued by the Princess. When rescued, however, the only comment that the Prince makes to
the Princess is how dirty she is. The Princess decides that the Prince is unappreciative and leaves
happily by herself walking away in the sunset. This illustration prompts Jerry into sharing:
“Maybe the guy [Prince Ronald] doesn’t want to marry her”. Instead of recognizing that the aim
of the book is about how the Princess decides that it is better to be alone than married to the
wrong person, Jerry redirects the attention onto the male character by seeking to find a reason for
his actions. Jerry’s comment not only recreated the purpose of this ending, but also demonstrated
a level of critical thinking in that it is possible to assume that perhaps the Prince acted unkindly
in a response to liberate himself from the duties of marrying the Princess. Whether Jerry’s

109

perspective about the conclusion had been fully developed in his mind, and was most likely in
contradiction to the author’s purpose, Jerry did offer an alternative reason for the Prince’s
reactions as well as demonstrate his understanding and assumptions about gender norms.
Critical Literacy toward Sexuality or Gender in Action. In analyzing the transcripts
for shifts in which Jerry appeared to alter his responses, critical literacy occurred in two
significant ways according to this data source. First, Jerry’s initial response to books which
portrayed activities commonly related to girls caused Jerry to react in negative ways. When
reading Olivia and the Fairy Princess (Falconer, 2012), Jerry made reference that the book was
only for girls as it talked about princesses. His perception, however, about princesses only
pertaining to girls was called into question when we read My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010). In
this book, the main character, a boy, dreams of being a princess and mainly wears dresses and
tiaras. Jerry continues to resist this representation and offers explanations as to why other
children are laughing at the Princess Boy. After reading the book, the participants and teacher
discussed how mocking the Princess Boy was an unkind gesture that did not demonstrate support
and understanding of being different. As a result, when The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011)
and 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008) was read with similar themes, Jerry’s resistance lessened. In
fact, while reading a book about a boy born with pink hair, Jerry inquires as to why some people
are mocking the boy, but not the girl who also has pink hair. This inquiry illustrates that Jerry is
recognizing that having pink hair is different and that laughing at only the boy and not the girl is
an unjust response. During the reading of 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008), which portrays a
character who identifies as a girl, but born as a boy, Bailey, dreaming of wearing dresses, Jerry
does not interject any negative comments. Jerry, according to this data source, demonstrated a
greater degree of awareness about children who may defy conventional gender expression.

110

Another instance of critical literacy in action occurred around the concept of marriage.
Jerry is first introduced to the concept that not all people wish to marry while reading Princess
Smartypants (Cole, 1986). This book portrays a princess who outsmarts all her suitors in the
pursuit of remaining single. Jerry’s initial reactions are toward the suitor who finally performs all
the dangerous feats for the princesses’ hand. Jerry is confused as to why the suitor accepts the
multiple challenges. An interesting twist occurs however when reading The Paper Bag Princess
(Munsch, 1995) which is about a princess who saves her prince-to-be. Once the prince is
rescued, he insults the princess on the basis of her dirty garments which causes the princess to
change her mind and leave without him.
The purpose of both books is to demonstrate that not every princess needs a prince and
thus people, and women, in particular, can be happy being alone. Instead of recognizing the
rudeness of the prince and how the princess realizes that she would be better alone, Jerry views
the rudeness of the prince as a means to purge his marriage to the princess. Although this
perspective is very unlikely on the part of the authors, Jerry’s viewpoint could also be accurate in
that it might be the prince seeking liberation in a similar fashion as in princess did so in the book,
Princess Smartypants. In sum, Jerry’s thinking about marriage, which generally links characters
to the opposite sex in most children books, and about various gender expressions shifted during
this process.
Critical Literacy Drawings
To analyze the critical literacy drawings with consistency across this particular data set
and across the participants, parameters were set: participants were asked to draw what they
thought the author or illustrator wanted them to remember the most about the book. Participants
drew their critical literacy drawings following the critical readings sessions which involved

111

discussing the author’s purpose of the book. The critical drawings were evaluated as to whether
the weekly drawing related to the author’s purpose or main character. A drawing was coded as
Student Rejects, if a participant drew a picture unrelated to the author’s purpose or main
character. If certain elements related to the author’s purpse or to the main characters were
changed, the drawing was coded as Student Recreates. Finally, if the participant drew about the
author’s purpose or replicated the character after the author’s creation, the picture was coded as
Student Replicates. Jerry produced eleven critical drawings, as he was absent one day during the
study.
Student Rejects. Out of the possible eleven drawings, Jerry produced three drawings
coded into this category. After reading King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004), in
which two kings travel on their honeymoon and return home to find their soon to be daughter in
their suitcase, Jerry draws a picture of one of the kings who has a red face due to a mosquito bite
(see Appendix I). This was the first book in the study in which two men discuss their desire to
have a child together and adopt the young girl they discover in their suitcase on their arrival
home. Jerry, like Page, drew a picture of only one of the men. Jerry was sitting close to Page,
who drew a comparable picture, it is very likely that Jerry followed Page’s direction and
produced a similar drawing. By not focusing on the main theme, which was an alternative
family, or depicting the young girl, Jerry ignores the author’s purpose by only drawing the
King’s red face. The annoying mosquito is unrelated to the Kings’ love together, their desire to
have a child, or their decision to adopt the girl at the end of the story. Jerry has opted to omit
alternative family representations or same-sex representations in his picture. In comparison to the
transcripts in which Jerry tends to support the union of the two kings in the book, this data set
offers a different perspective. It is hard to distinguish why Jerry verbally supported this book, but

112

rejected it in the drawing, but it very likely that Page’s drawing played an important role in
helping Jerry decide what to draw.
Jerry produces another picture coded in this category which is also very similar to one of
Pages’. After reading A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschlager, 2010), a book with two dads and a
daughter, Jerry draws a picture of a secondary character, a boy who falls down and hurts his
knee. This picture is either influenced by Page’s, who draws an identical picture, or after the
illustration in the book in which a friend of the daughter’s, a young boy, stumbles and hurts his
knee. The boy then inquires as to which father takes care of the girl when she injures herself.
Jerry rejects this story, within this data set, in that he chose not to draw elements related to the
main theme, which was about alternative families, as well as any of the main characters in the
story. Jerry’s critical literacy picture deeply contrasts with the transcripts, in that in the
transcripts, Jerry clearly acknowledges the family structure, a girl and two dads, before reading
the book. Jerry similarly makes verbal connections by comparing his father to the two fathers in
the story. It is unclear as to why Jerry rejected the characters and the main theme in his drawing,
yet it is possible that Page’s picture influenced Jerry more.
The third and final picture that Jerry produced in this category pertained to My Princess
Boy (Kilodavis, 2010). In this book, a young boy prefers to wear tiaras and dresses and is often
mocked by others due to his difference. Jerry drew a picture of a Princess Boy with bloody
lacerations, and explains the picture: People are cutting the Princess Boy (see Appendix J).
Jerry likely rejected the representation of the Princess Boy as it did not coincide with other
princess representations he had been offered in other books outside of the research site. The
Princess Boy was also the first representation in the study which depicted a boy seeking to be a
princess. Given that the story discussed how the Princess Boy faced ridicule from people outside

113

of his family, some may consider Jerry’s critical literacy drawing to be depicting the Princess
Boy as emotionally wounded. Jerry’s verbal responses toward this book in the transcripts do not
support this claim. What does support this claim is how Jerry offered a different response to a
similar book. In 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008) the main character, Bailey, born as a boy, but
identifies as a girl, dreams of wearing different types of dresses. Bailey, like the Princess Boy is
also ridiculed in the story, but unlike the Princess Boy, Bailey receives ridicule from family
members. Both books, My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010) and 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008)
portray the main character, the Princess Boy and Bailey, as happy individuals at the conclusion
of the book. Yet, Jerry’s portrayals of these characters in his critical literacy drawings differ
greatly. The Princess Boy is depicted with laceration wounds while Bailey is depicted in a crystal
dress.
Similar to his verbal responses toward this book, My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010),
Jerry’s critical literacy drawing shows that he continued to struggle with the notion that some
people, born as boys, prefer to express themselves in unconventional ways. This notion tended to
conflict with other representations to which Jerry had been offered about boys and caused him to
react in oppositional ways. It is unclear as to why Jerry decided to depict an aggressive scene;
perhaps in doing so, Jerry was asserting his belief about how boys should act according to
society. This resistance decreases as the study continues.
Student Replicates. Out of the eleven drawings, Jerry produced six pictures coded into
in this category. In general, Jerry replicated the author’s purpose in the majority of his critical
literacy drawings. Jerry replicated three drawings which were related to sexuality in that the
books portrayed same-sex families and three drawings were related to gender topics. In looking
at the books which included various family structures, Jerry replicated the first book, The Family

114

Book (Parr, 2010), by drawing a picture of a single mother kissing her son goodnight (see
Appendix K). Jerry first discussed about drawing a picture with both of his parents, but modified
his plan by only drawing a female character. The second critical literacy picture about families
which Jerry drew was in relation to Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two Mom Story (Considine,
2005). Instead of drawing the two mothers depicted in the book, Jerry draws a picture of their
daughter, Emma. In order to assure accuracy, this picture was coded under this category as Jerry
did draw one of the main characters in the book, unlike some of his other drawings, which were
coded differently. The final critical literacy picture in this category about families was The White
Swan Express: A Story about Adoption (Okimoto & Aoki, 2002) which reveals several different
family types adopting baby girls in China. For this book, Jerry drew a picture of a baby swaddled
in a red blanket (see Appendix L). Since many of the illustrations use the color red which is also
closely associated to many Chinese items, it is assumed that is the reason why Jerry picked this
color for the baby. Instead of focusing the various family units seeking to adopt a child, one of
which was a single mother, and other two women, Jerry chooses to draw only the child. One
interpretation of this picture could be that Jerry is placing more attention on the child having her
or his needs met by qualifying adults versus the structure of the family, and thus becomes a
secondary concern for Jerry, and one that is not worthy of illustrating in the picture.
The final three pictures related to gender expression. After reading Olivia and the Fairy
Princess (Falconer, 2012) in which Olivia questions her parents as to why everyone wants to be
a pink princess instead of desiring to be an Indian Princess or African Princess, Olivia ultimately
decides to be a Queen at the end. For this book, Jerry draws a picture of Olivia who is wearing
pink and is crying. This picture not only replicates the main character but also the theme in that
Olivia fought the notion that girls should merely wear pink. The second picture in which Jerry

115

replicated the book or main character was in regards to Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986). In
this picture, Jerry depicts one of the final scenes in the book in which the princess kisses the final
standing suitor who turns into a toad, her attempt to remain single. Although Jerry struggled with
why this suitor would agree to perform multiple dangerous feats for the Princess’s hand in
marriage, and in turn places the attention on the suitor rather than the Princess, the main
character of the book, Jerry’s critical literacy picture reveals equal importance on both characters
by depicting them in the picture. The final picture in which Jerry replicates in relation to gender
is 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008). This book, similar to My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010),
focuses on a child born as a boy, but identities as a girl, Bailey, who dreams of wearing eclectic
dresses. No one, including Bailey’s family, understands this desire, except a girl in the
neighborhood, who loves to sew and eventually aids Bailey with constructing the dresses. For
this critical literacy drawing, Jerry drew Bailey wearing a crystal dress (see Appendix M). This
picture is inspired after one of the illustrations in the book in which Bailey dreams about a
crystal dress. This critical literacy drawing, which was the final drawing in the study, shows
much more transformation and less resistance on the part of Jerry about boys expressing
themselves in nontraditional ways. Jerry not only depicted the main character, but he also
replicated the author’s purpose which was about the character’s desire to wear very ornate
dresses.
Student Recreates. In this category, Jerry produced two drawings. These drawings
displayed the quality of recreating in that he altered the form of the main character in some
degree. For instance, when asked to draw his critical literacy picture regarding the book, The
Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995), which portrays a princess saving the prince from a wild
dragon. Jerry recreated the dragon by transforming him into an enormous caterpillar that is

116

sleeping after the Princess has strategically exhausted him, so that she may enter the castle
unharmed to get the prince (see Appendix N). Although Jerry does replicate the Princess
outsmarting the dragon by causing him to fall into a deep slumber; the reason as to why Jerry
decided to draw a caterpillar is unclear.
The second book in which Jerry recreates the main character occurs after reading The Boy
with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011). In this story, the main character, a boy, is born with pink hair. For
this drawing, Jerry recreates the character by not only making his hair pink, but also his legs, his
shirt, and even his eyes and mouth (see Appendix O). In addition, Jerry depicts him as eating a
pink ice cream cone. Given that the boy with pink hair liked to cook and prepare food in the
story, it is not surprising that Jerry depicted him as eating. In contrast to the book, however, the
main character, the boy, is illustrated as only having pink hair, his remaining features are typical:
blue eyes, green shirt, and blue jeans. The fact that Jerry embraced the color pink in his drawing
by incorporating it to the fullest, demonstrates a greater awareness on the part of Jerry about not
classifying colors according to one’s gender.
Critical Literacy toward Sexuality and Gender in Action. One of the most significant
ways that critical literacy toward sexuality and gender occurred in this data set was with the
transition between the pictures dealing with gender issues over the course of the study. In the
eighth week, Jerry produced a critical literacy picture of a Princess Boy who received lacerations
from other people. Jerry rejected this book, My Princess Boy (Kilodavisk, 2010), by illustrating
the main character as physically wounded for his desire to express himself in another way.
Critical discussions based on various gender expressions occurred which took the focus off
children expressing themselves differently to being compassionate and understanding everyone’s
right to be unique. These conversations juxtaposed with Jerry’s right to articulate his

117

contradictory views allowed him to shift toward being more receptive about others’ differences.
For instance, Jerry’s critical literacy drawing for The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011)
exhibited an enormous amount of pink. Jerry not only drew the boy with pink hair, but every
feature, including clothes and facial elements, were also pink. This drawing illustrates Jerry’s
acceptance over the notion that boys could be associated with the color pink, given that
everything in the picture, except for the outline of the boy’s face, is pink which is unlike the
book. The final critical literacy in action occurs after reading the last book, in which Jerry
demonstrates a level of normalcy toward alternative gender expression after reading 10,000
Dresses (Ewert, 2008). Jerry does not resist or embellish the main character, Bailey, who dreams
of wearing dresses. In fact, Jerry depicts Bailey in his critical literacy drawing as portrayed in the
book in reference to both appearance and action. Through exposure to LGBTQ-books, critical
literacy practices, and critical literacy drawings, Jerry’s actions transformed over the course of
the study concerning gender.
Photographs and Pre- and Post-Assessment
In order to provide consistency across the study, the only two categories which applied to
the photographs were: Student Rejects or Student Replicates. Photographs captured by the
participants were coded as Student Rejects if the picture rejected traditional roles in relation to
sexuality or gender. For instance, photographs of any type of text, both movies and books, which
defied nontraditional gender and sexuality roles were coded into this category. Photographs
portraying conventional roles pertaining to sexuality or gender were labeled as: Student
Replicates. The final category, Student Recreates, was not utilized in that no initial data source
was used in order to suggest that the student “recreated” a specific product or character. Out of

118

the 24 pictures, eight were coded as Student Replicates, eight were coded as Student Rejects and
eight were not included due to blurriness, redundancy, or not related to project.
Contrary to the photographs, the pre- and post-assessment pieces were analyzed
according to all three categories: Student Rejects, Student Replicates, and Student Recreates. The
assessment pieces were evaluated on whether there was change from the first drawing to the
second. Analyzing the photographs and the pre- and post-assessment pieces in unison provided
an inclusive data set, which offered responses in each area.
Student Rejects. Jerry captured eight photographs of books, DVDs, or characters which
did not portray stereotypical roles of men and women in relation to gender or sexuality. Seven of
the pictures included characters which were nonhuman, but personification occurred in all but
one. One text, Tales of the Cryptids (Halls & Spears, 2006), was an expository text about
legendary creatures known to exist. Three of the texts utilized animals as the main characters
who dealt with various problems. For instance, one book, a Dr. Seuss text, Put Me In the Zoo
(Lopshire, 1960), described a polka dotted animal who craved to live at the zoo. Another book, I
Got Two Dogs (Lithgow & Neubecker, 2008) portrays two clumsy and raucous dogs who are
silly but well-loved the neighbors. The third text in this category, Never Take a Shark to the
Dentist (Barrett & Nickle, 2008), includes various animals such as giraffes, goats, and pigs
taking on human tasks and failing miserably. The remaining four texts consist of a diverse
assortment. For instance, one photo is of Darth Vader, a character from Star Wars (1977), while
another includes the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2015), a series on Nickelodeon. Both of
these pictures include characters resembling male epic figures which could be interpreted as
conveying to stereotypical gender norms; however, their sexuality and gender overall remain
mute. Another book which includes personification is Planes, Fire & Rescue (Gannaway &

119

Hernandez, 2014) the main character Dusty Crop-hopper dreams of soaring alongside his highflying friends in a race. The final book and the only one with a human, The Class Pet from the
Black Lagoon (Thaler & Lee, 2008), portrays a young boy whose imagination runs wild when
the teacher tells the class that they will be getting a pet. Collectively these pictures portray Jerry
as someone interested in fantasy and adventurous characters that provide both drama and
comedy to the story.
Student Replicates. Jerry took eight pictures that replicated the traditional roles of men
and women in relation to gender and sexuality. All of the books contained a main character
raised in a traditional heterosexual family structure; only one book replicated the stereotypical
gender roles of girls. Six of the books included animals as main characters, while two of the
books had humans as the main character. For instance, Halloween Howl (Herman, 2004) and
Clifford’s Family (Bridwell, 2010), the main character, Clifford, is a red dog who lives with
Emily Elizabeth and her mother and father. Other books included, Berenstain Bears’: Bedtime
Battle (Berenstain, 2008), The World of Arthur and Friends (Brown, 2004), Hurry Up! Franklin
(Bourgeois, 2012) and Splat the Cat: The Rain is a Pain (Scotton, 2012), of which include bears,
turtles, and cats as the main characters, but are depicted alongside their mother and father. The
final texts with humans are Sloppy Joe (Keane & Brunkus, 2009) and Sophia the First: Once
Upon a Princess (Disney, 2013). Sloppy Joe is about a young boy who struggles to be neat, until
his family-mother, father, grandmother and grandfather encourage him to embrace his
uniqueness. While this story focuses on being proud of one’s uniqueness, the uniqueness only
pertains to being orderly and neat, which is arguably not a biological uniqueness. The last text, a
DVD, is about a newly found princess, Sophie, who struggles to fit in with her new family who
include a mother, father, sister and brother. Sophie and her family comply with both gender and

120

sexuality traditional roles in the film. One final and significant element to note is that this picture
demonstrates that Jerry’s resistance toward items typically pertaining to girls decreased over the
course of the study in that initially Jerry would have avoided stories with a princess, as equally
supported in other parts of the data.
Student Recreates. Jerry’s pre- and post-assessment drawings were coded into this
category since his post-assessment drawing offered qualities of being recreated when analyzed
next to his pre-assessment drawing. Jerry’s pre-assessment drawing incorporated conventional
family roles while his post-assessment drawing did not. For instance, his pre-assessment
included a family with a mother, father, and small child, a girl, while his post-assessment
drawing consisted of a smiling monster with three bloody scratches. Jerry, like the other
participants, was instructed to draw a character that he would like to see in a book for both
drawings. Jerry’s pre-assessment drawing suggests that he had been mostly exposed to books
with heterosexual family structures since this is the representation he opted to depict. His postassessment drawing could imply that after reading LGBTQ-books, some of which included
dragons and imaginary creatures, Jerry began to consider other options for primary characters in
books. Although his post-assessment drawing does not portray a same-sex family or an
individual who defies the gender norms, it does in effect evade such classifications all together
by constructing a creature in which sexuality and gender categorizing are absent. For this reason,
his post-assessment picture could be perceived as Student Rejects. Yet, given that Jerry
significantly altered his pre- and post- assessment drawing, this data set offers a better
description and a more plausible quality of recreating characters, which is why his postassessment was coded as Student Recreates and not Student Rejects.

121

Critical Literacy toward Sexuality or Gender in Action. There are two examples of
critical literacy toward sexuality and gender in action in this data set. First, Jerry generally
provided an equal amount of photographs which both portrayed conventional roles to those that
did not. Additionally, Jerry included a picture of a princess despite previously asserting during
the first week that princesses were only for girls. Second, after given the prompt to draw
characters that he would like to see in books for his pre-assessment drawing, Jerry’s picture
included a mother, a father, and a little girl. Since this was the first drawing produced in the
study, it suggests that Jerry had mostly been exposed to heterosexual family characters in texts.
His post-assessment drawing however portrays a smiling monster bleeding. Jerry’s postassessment picture avoids any categorical markers in that gender and sexuality become unclear.
Whether reading books which portrayed alternative families and characters which defied
traditional gender roles affected Jerry’s post-assessment picture is difficult to establish, but given
the significant variation between the pre- and post- assessment drawings, it is likely that the
readings were impactful to some degree.
Summary
The findings regarding Jerry’s responses across the data sources reveal that critical
literacy in action took place and consequently transformative thinking occurred in the areas of
both sexuality and gender. Data highlighted how Jerry initially resisted the concept of princesses
as he believed it only pertained to girls. Over the course of the study, data showed how Jerry’s
resistance decreased as result of critically reading texts which defied traditional gender roles for
both girls and boys. The most poignant example was the transformation that occurred between
the critical literacy drawings from My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010) to 10,000 Dresses (Ewert,
2008), in which Jerry draws the princess boy slashed to depicting Bailey, born as a boy, but

122

identifies as a girl, in the final story as is represented by the author and illustrator. Another way
in which critical literacy took place was by Jerry recognizing that not everyone seeks to be
married. After reading Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986) in which a Princess dodges getting
married by tricking her suitors, Jerry believes that a Prince, in another story, seeks to do the same
by being rude to a Princess in the book titled: The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995). The final
way in which critical literacy took place was through Jerry becoming aware that not all families
consist of a mother and a father. Jerry’s post-assessment drawing, his photographs, and his
tendency to verbally support families with two fathers demonstrate that Jerry began to consider
other nontraditional representations. In sum, Jerry’s case study suggests how critical literacy
caused Jerry to reflect and transform his thinking in regards to gender expectations, marriage,
and family structures in general.
Case 3: Hank
Background
At the time of this study, Hank was a seven year old kindergartner, being raised by a
mother and a father. He has an identical twin brother who was also initially in the study. Hank
was selected to participate as opposed to his brother who was eliminated because Hank generated
imaginative comments and drew unique images unlike the other participants. Hank viewed the
world in a way that made sense to him and he did appear to be influenced by the demonstrative
personalities of others in the group. For instance, after reading a book in which Olivia, a pig,
examines why everyone wants to be a princess, Jerry claims that the book is only for girls. The
teacher then asked all the participants if they agree with Jerry. Hank asserted his viewpoint
which was contradictory to Jerry’s by stating “no”. Jerry reacted by stating the word “yes” twice
and then takes a winning stance claiming that there are a higher number of negative responses.

123

Hank grasps Jerry’s strategy and responds by offering two affirmative responses which ends the
match between the two boys. This duo demonstrates that Hank is able to assert himself and
support his views when they differ from another’s. Hank offered a bit of candidness to the study
in that when asked to make predictions about the books we would read, he would simply say “I
have no idea, I have never seen that book.”
Although Hank supplied the fewest responses in comparison to Page and Jerry, his
responses were distinctive and reflected yet another perspective that children may have. Table
4.3 provides an overview of Hank’s responses which were analyzed in the study and are
discussed in detail below.
Table 4.3
Data Collection for Hank
Rejects
Replicates
Recreates
______________________________________________________________________________
Transcripts
3 (LGBTQ)
11 (LGBTQ)
11 (LGBTQ)
Critical Literacy Drawings

2 (LGBTQ)

5 (LGBTQ)

5 (LGBTQ)

Photographs

Blank Role

Blank Role

N/A

Pre- & Post Assessment
Pre/ Post (Traditional)
______________________________________________________________________________
Note. Transcripts and Critical Literacy Drawings were analyzed as to whether Hank rejected,
replicated, or recreated LGBTQ-themed representations. In contrast, the photographs as well as
the pre- and post-assessment drawings were analyzed as to whether Hank rejected, replicated or
recreated traditional sexuality and gender representations.
Transcripts
Analyzing the transcripts included examining both solicited and unsolicited responses to
the critical reading sessions. Hank produced a greater amount of unsolicited responses and did
not consistently provide a response to each of the solicited questions. Both responses were
equally important to examine as they provided an overall perspective of how Hank viewed
124

sexuality and gender topics in relation to the texts and to the world. The following sections are
divided according to the three responses: Student Rejects, Student Replicates, and Student
Recreates. The final section discusses critical literacy in action pertaining to this particular data
set and whether such occurred for Hank. Overall, Hank’s responses were coded as Student
Replicates or Student Recreates with the least being coded as Student Rejects.
Student Rejects. Hank often articulated wavering viewpoints. For instance, during the
reading of Olivia and the Fairy Princess (Falconer, 2012) Hank stated that the book could be for
both boys and girls. Also, Hank was the first to claim that “there are no girl colors or boy colors”
when issues related to gender differences would surface. Hank expressed support of genderless
items during certain sessions, while contradicting himself in other sessions. For instance, in
contrast to the reading of Olivia and the Fairy Princess, Hank resisted the book My Princess Boy
(Kilodavis, 2010). In asking him what was one thing he had in common with the Princess Boy,
Hank dodged the question by stating: “I will draw him without the princess things.” Although
Hank initially resisted categorical markers for both boys and girls in relation to gender, his
response to My Princess Boy suggests another perspective. Perhaps diverse gender representation
were too extreme for Hank, as it was most likely the first time he had been exposed to such a
representation.
Another time in which Hank appeared to reject the story was in reading The White Swan
Express: A Story about Adoption (Okimoto & Aoki, 2002). The book represents various families,
all with different structures, traveling to China to adopt an infant girl. Instead of focusing on the
mixtures of families represented or about the adoption process, Hank makes a few off topic
comments. For instance, he shares, “there are lots of things to do on a plane.” Hank remains
focused on the secondary elements of the story versus replicating or recreating the main

125

characters or discussing the author’s purpose of the book. Near the end of the story, Hank’s
responses alter a bit, as he works to recreate certain elements of the book.
Student Replicates. Hank offered a fair amount of responses under this category by
replicating thoughts related to the main characters or the author’s purpose. Hank preferred to
demonstrate his knowledge of the selected book by interrupting the read aloud sessions during
storytime. For instance, while reading Princess Smarytpants (Cole, 1986), in which a princess
seeks her autonomy, Hank interrupts to predict the final sentence in the book.
Teacher: When the other princes heard what had happened to Prince Swashbuckle, none
of them wanted to marry Princess Smartypants so she…
Hank: lives ever after.
Hank’s predication is accurate which reveals that Hank understood that the main character,
Princess Smartypants, constructed numerous barriers in an attempt to avoid marriage. Another
time in which Hank produces an accurate prediction and interjects his comments took place
when reading Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011), a book about two mothers seeking
matrimony. The marriage between the two mothers is concealed to the reader until the
conclusion of the story. Hank surmises that a marriage is about to occur and expresses his
knowledge in the below event.
Teacher: What do you think is inside the white satin box?
Hank stands up and makes the gesture of opening the white box on one knee.
The reader is only aware of a special event taking place; the fact that it is a marriage between
two women is not divulged until the last two pages. Hank’s ability to mimic the gesture of asking
someone’s hand in matrimony demonstrates that he has comprehended that the event is a
wedding. Once Hank realizes that the marriage involves the two mothers of the young boy,

126

Donovan, Hank does not resist the representation by offering any negative comments or
disapproving body gestures. The final example of Hank interjecting himself into the conversation
by interrupting the teacher happened when discussing the book, A Tale of Two Daddies
(Oelschlager, 2010).
Teacher: because Jerry was not here last week, who can tell him what we read? The title
of the book was A Tale…
Hank: A Tale of Two Dads, it’s about dads, like X and X.
In this example, Hank demonstrates that he not only remembered the title of the book but more
importantly that the author’s purpose was about the family having two fathers. Hank then makes
a deeper connection to the book by connecting it to twin girls in the school who have two fathers.
Overall, Hank remained focused during most of the readings and enjoyed figuring out
clues within the stories. As we read, King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijanld, 2004), a book
about two kings honeymooning in a jungle who find a young girl in their suitcase when they
return home, Hank replicates one of the events in the story. For instance, one part of the story
shows the two kings canoeing along a river and discussing how they feel someone is following
them. In the accompanying illustration, a small tube is peeping out of the water which leads the
reader to believe that someone is breathing underwater. As the story concludes and the young
girl pops out of the suitcase, Hank raises his hand to shout out, “the pipe was the girl, the girl is
the pipe”. Hank is not certain how to correctly articulate that the person following the Kings
underwater was the girl, but it is evident that he understood the story and replicated a section of
the story.
Other instances of Hank replicating the main character or themes took place during the
reading of The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011). In discussing why the main character has pink

127

hair, Hank shares: “because he likes pink hair and there is no boy colors or girl colors”. This
perspective portrays Hank has having a nontraditional viewpoint about gender and feeling
comfortable to replicate the main theme of the book which is to celebrate everyone’s uniqueness.
A final example of Hank replicating the author’s purpose of the story occurred when reading
10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008) in which Hank remains quiet for most of the story. When asked
whether he thought there were other persons like Bailey, the main character, born as a boy, but
identities as a girl and enjoys wearing dresses. Hank responds, “Yes, like in the other book.” This
comment demonstrates that Hank has not only understood the theme of 10,000 Dresses by not
rejecting or recreating the main character or author’s purpose, but in fact makes a distinct
connection to a comparable book, My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010) which we read previously.
Hanks’ comment also suggests growth given that Hank initially rejected the book, My Princess
Boy, by not wanting to depict the Princess Boy in feminine attire.
Student Recreates. Given that Hank often provided a unique perspective, he equally
offered responses which were coded as Student Recreates. Hank tended to recreate elements of
the story by altering the main character or the author’s purpose to represent versions more to his
liking. For instance, after reading Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), and in response to a
critical literacy question of what surprised him the most in the book, Hank responded: “I like the
ending of the book cause her holding up the drink”. Instead of focusing on the fact that the
princess had evaded the obligation of getting married, Hank recreated the final scene by focusing
on the princess raising her arm to make a celebratory gesture. Hank does not verbally clarify that
the princess is elated due to her unwed status but does acknowledge that the princess appears
happy. Whether this scene surprised him because the princess is finally single is unclear, except
that the teacher’s question caused him to make some sort of connection to it.

128

Although Hank offered many responses which replicated the main character or the
author’s purpose, at times he would also interject comments demonstrating how he would
recreate the same book. For instance, while reading, King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland,
2004) in which Hank supplied many comments which replicated the events of the story, Hank
decides to recreate the final story at the end. When asked why he thought the author wrote the
book, Hank declares: “I think people like different pets.” Hank’s comment is mostly likely
influenced by the various animals represented in the book as the two Kings honeymoon in a
jungle. This comment demonstrates that while Hank was able to replicate many parts of the
story, he also felt that the animals played an equally important role in the story.
Another way in which Hank would recreate the main characters was by changing their
gender. For instance, after reading A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschalger, 2010) which portrays
two fathers and their daughter, Hank claims that he wants to draw the little girl as a boy. This
type of occurrence appeared once more after reading The White Swan Express: A Story About
Adoption (Okimoto & Aoki, 2002) when Hank declares that he plans to draw the infant girls in
the story as boys. Hank does not provide details as to why he prefers to depict boys instead of
girls when discussing family representations. Perhaps Hank prefers to imagine families similar to
his own which consist of boys as the children.
Critical Literacy toward Sexuality and Gender in Action. The most significant way
in which critical literacy toward sexuality or gender in action took place within this data set
occurred from across the readings of My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010), The Boy with Pink Hair
(Hilton, 2011) and 10, 000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008). Hank initially rejected the author’s purpose
and main character of the book, My Princess Boy, by stating that he would draw the boy without
the princess attire. Although Hank accepted that the main character was born as a boy, he did not

129

associate the boy with wanting to wear dresses and tiaras and thus refused to merge these
representations as one. As we read The Boy with Pink Hair, Hank exclaimed that the main
character had pink hair because he liked it, and followed this comment with the declaration that
there are no boy or girl colors. In this incident, Hank duplicates the comment he made while
reading Olivia and The Fairy Princesses (Falconer, 2012) about genderless color choices. It is
unclear as to why Hank did not interject this comment while reading My Princess Boy. During
the last reading, 10,000 Dresses, which portrays a child born as boy, but identifies as a girl,
dreaming of dresses, Hank offers little responses, except when asked if he could recall other
people like the main character. Hank not only offers an affirmative response, but also connects it
to the book My Princess Boy. This connection demonstrates that Hank understood the similarities
between the main characters in these two books and, unlike the reading of the Princess Boy, he
did not reject this final main character, Bailey, in 10,000 Dresses.
Critical Literacy Drawings
The same parameters used with Page and Jerry were applied to Hank’s critical literacy
drawings in order to provide consistency across this data set: participants were asked to draw
what they thought the author or illustrator wanted them to remember the most about the book.
The critical literacy drawings occurred following the critical reading discussions which included
talking about the author’s purpose of the book. Analysis of the critical drawings consisted of
whether the weekly drawings related to the author’s purpose or to the main character. A drawing
was coded as Student Rejects, if a participant drew a picture unrelated to the author’s purpose or
to the main character. If modifications to the author’s purpose or to the main character were
made the drawing was coded as Student Recreates. Drawings which replicated the author’s

130

purpose or the main character were labeled as Student Replicates. Hank produced a picture for
each book thereby allowing an analysis of twelve drawings.
Student Rejects. Out of the twelve drawings, Hank produced two pictures coded into
this category. Hank opted to depict animals instead of refer to the central theme for each of these
books. For instance, for The Family Book (Parr, 2010), Hank’s drawing included a monkey
hanging in a tree and an alligator lying in a hammock (see Appendix P). Hank is rejecting the
multiple ways in which different variations of families occurred in the book. His picture is
unique and thus does not resemble any of the book’s illustration. Additionally, Hank only
conjures up the statement that the two animals are playing hide-n-seek. Although the book does
include colorful illustrations of some animals, there is a family theme represented in the pictures,
unlike in Hank’s drawing or comment about his critical literacy drawing.
Hank produced another picture coded in this category after reading the book Princess
Smartypants (Cole, 1986). Instead of depicting the princess or the multiple suitors, the main
characters of the story, Hank draws a picture of unrecognizable creatures eating alongside an
enormous alligator wearing shoes (see Appendix Q). Hank’s picture demonstrates that he did not
deeply connect to any of the characters in the book or ponder about the princess seeking to
remain single as none of these representations appeared in his drawing. Oddly, Hank does note
the princess in the data transcripts, particularly at the end of the story, but does not create her or
the suitor in his drawing. In sum, Hank rejected one book which portrayed various family
configurations, such as same-sex families, and another book in relation to diverse gender
expression.
Student Replicates. Out of the twelve drawings, Hank produced five pictures in this
category. Overall, Hank produced an equal amount of drawings in this category as well as in

131

Student Recreates. This finding is comparable to the transcript findings. Hank constructed three
drawings in relation to books about gender expression and two drawings in relation to books
portraying a same-sex family. Hank replicated two same-sex families which appeared in two
different books. For instance, after reading the King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland,
2004), a book in which two kings go to the jungle for their honeymoon, Hank draws a picture of
both of the kings standing on a bridge in the jungle next to an ape (see Appendix R). The second
critical literacy drawing about families produced by Hank occurred after reading Donovan’s Big
Day (Newman, 2011) in which two mothers wed and their son is the ring bearer. In this picture,
Hank draws the son, Donovan, standing between the two mothers and who is receiving a kiss on
his cheek from one of his mothers (see Appendix S). These pictures suggest that Hank felt
comfortable about same-sex family representations in that he reproduced a family as well as a
couple with two men and two women. Although Hank did reject a book, The Family Book (Parr,
2010) which included same-sex representations, it might be possible that Hank needed explicit
representations in order for those representations to make sense. For example, the two books in
this category only focused on one same-sex family or couple, while The Family Book portrayed a
wide arrangement of families.
The final three pictures related to gender expression. After reading Olivia and the Fairy
Princesses (Falconer, 2012), a book in which Olivia resists being an American Princess by
pretending to be other role models, Hank draws Olivia wearing a warthog costume. Hank’s
drawing is influenced by an illustration in which Olivia wears such a costume for Halloween.
This picture not only replicates the main character but also the theme in that Olivia took pleasure
in trying on nontraditional representations. The second picture in which Hank replicated the book
or main character occurred after reading The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995). In this critical

132

literacy drawing, Hank depicted the dragon that Princess Elizabeth outsmarted in order to save
Prince Ronald. The author’s purpose of the book was to spotlight that not every princess should
marry a prince. Hank describes his picture as the dragon engulfing the princess’s clothes with
fire (see Appendix T). Hank’s picture is depicting an actual event in the story which causes
Princess Elizabeth to wear a paper bag the rest of the story. The final picture in which Hank
replicates the author’s purpose and the main character occurs with 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008).
Hank draws Bailey, the main character, born as a boy, but identifies as a girl, in a crystal dress
(see Appendix U). This picture is taken from one of the illustrations in the book in which Bailey
dreams about wearing a crystal dress. Hank’s final critical literacy drawing demonstrates much
transformation and less resistance on the part of Hank toward representations of diverse gender
expression.
Student Recreates. In this category, Hank recreated five out of the twelve critical
literacy pictures by altering the form of a main character in the book by some degree. For
instance, after reading Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two Mom Story (Considine, 2005), a book
with two mothers, a daughter, and a cat, Hank draws a picture of an angry cat. Although there is
a cat in the story in which Emma plays with in unusual ways, the cat does not repeal or act
unkindly toward Emma. Hank has decided to recreate the cat as being upset. The second critical
literacy drawing in which Hank changes the main character occurs with The Boy with Pink Hair
(Hilton, 2011). Instead of drawing the main character with pink hair, Hank depicts the main
character with purple hair (see Appendix V). It is unclear as to why Hank opted for purple
instead of pink, yet Hank still selected a color which is mostly associated with girls than boys.
The final picture in which Hank recreated the main character took place after reading My
Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010). Before drawing his picture, Hank commented that he would

133

draw the main character without the princess items. Hank draws the Princess Boy on both sides
of the paper and describes that the Princess Boy as wearing several different Halloween
costumes: Easter bunny, spider, ant, butterfly and an insect (see Appendices W and X). This
picture might also be classified as Student Rejects, as Hank consciously rejected the dresses and
tiaras worn by the main character as well as possibly viewed the princess attire as a costume and
not acceptable nor quotidian attire for the Princess Boy. This category however appeared to be
the best choice in that Hank did not depict the Princess Boy in typical boy attire but instead
viewed him in several genderless animal creations and recreated the Princess Boy in ways that
were important for Hank by inserting animal representations.
Another way in which Hank tended to recreate the main character was through changing
the sex. For instance, after reading Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschalger, 2010), a story about two
fathers and their daughter, Hank recreates the family with two fathers and their son (see
Appendix Y). Hank repeats this pattern when reading The White Swan Express: A Story about
Adoption (Okimoto & Aoki, 2002) in which the story portrays several different families traveling
to China to adopt an infant girl. For this critical literacy drawing, Hank draws only the children
but as boys and older (see Appendix Z). Hank describes this picture as the boys playing in water
while the parents are waiting to adopt them. The fact that Hank transforms the sex from girls to
boys in these drawings might suggest that such a representation makes the most sense to him
given that it resembles his family as well as provides him with additional male role models.
Critical Literacy toward Sexuality and Gender in Action. The most notable way in
which critical literacy toward sexuality and gender in action occurred in this data set was with
the variation in drawings dealing with gender expression. After reading My Princess Boy
(Kilodavis, 2010), Hank recreated the Princess Boy in his drawing by placing him in multiple

134

Halloween animal costumes. Before drawing the picture, Hank commented that he would draw
the Princess Boy but without the princess attire. The next book dealing with gender expression,
The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011) focused on a young boy with pink hair who was ridiculed
for his difference at school. Like the drawing above, Hank recreated the main character by
changing a particular element; in this case it was the boy’s hair color. Instead of pink, Hank drew
the character with purple hair, a color often associated with girls. It is unclear as to why Hank
opted for purple versus pink, but it appears that a conscious decision was made since he did not
select a nontraditional girl color such as blue or brown. When the final gender expression book
was read which focused on a character, born as a boy, but identifies as a girl, Bailey, who dreams
about dresses in 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008), Hank did not change any elements of the story.
In fact, Hank depicted an illustration in the story in which Bailey is wearing a crystal dress. By
applying critical literacy to LGBTQ-themed books, Hank’s actions toward nonconforming
gender expression transformed over the course of the study.
Photographs and Pre- and Post-Assessment
Hank’s camera produced a blank role; consequently, his pictures were not processed and
this data set will only include the pre- and post-assessment drawings. The pre and postassessment drawings which Hank produced were coded into one of these categories: Student
Rejects, Student Replicates, and Student Recreates. Evaluation included whether a change
occurred from the first drawing to the second drawing and whether traditional roles in relation to
gender and sexuality were rejected, replicated, or recreated from the pre-assessment to the posassessment.
Student Rejects. Hank’s pre- and post-assessment pictures were coded into this category
in that he rejected sexuality and gender in both pictures. Like the other participants, Hank was

135

instructed to draw a character that he would like to see in a book. In both drawings, Hank did not
depict any characters which could be classified as homosexual or heterosexual nor did he portray
the characters as acting or asserting themselves to one particular gender. For instance, Hank’s
pre-assessment picture consisted of two unrecognizable characters. The first character was tall
with three legs, a round belly, three arms and red spiky hair. The second character was short,
yellow, with long arms, and red spiky hair. Hank’s post assessment drawing included several
spiders, a stick figure with pizza hands, and a short yellow body with round eyes. Hank draws
similar representations in both of his drawings, representations of which are void of any human
categorical markers. Although it is impossible to know for certain, perhaps Hank is suggesting
that he would prefer to read books with characters that evade all classifications concerning
sexuality and gender given that he drew a similar picture for both assessments.
Critical Literacy toward Sexuality and Gender in Action. Since the photographs were
not part of the data set, the only useable data source was the pre- and post-assessment drawings.
It is challenging to speculate what is the best example of literacy in action toward sexuality and
gender given the limited data. Second, Hank did not demonstrate any significant transformations
from his pre- to post-assessment drawings. It can be noted however that after reading several
LGBTQ-themed books, Hank did not resist such portrayals by including traditional
representations in his post assessment drawing.
Summary
The findings regarding Hank’s responses across the data sources suggest that critical
literacy in action took place by means of transformative thinking around different forms of
gender expression. Data demonstrated how initially Hank verbally rejected or recreated
representations of young boys in dresses or tiaras. Through readings, discussions, and exposure

136

to gender variances, Hank’s initial responses transformed over the study. When the second book
was read, which portrayed a young boy with pink hair, Hank did not interject any negative
comments and only altered the boy’s hair color from pink to purple in his drawing. The final
story in the study included a similar representation as the one Hank initially rejected. During this
final reading, Hank not only connected it to the first reading, he also replicated an exact
illustration in the book for his critical literacy drawing. Critical literacy with a focus on sexuality
and gender encouraged Hank to become aware of various ways in which children may choose to
express their gender without judgment or shame by the final week.
Case 4: Teacher and Researcher
Background
As a researcher and a teacher, I assumed two roles throughout the course of the study. In
taking on these two roles, I gained the knowledge and skills needed to implement critical literacy
regarding sexuality and gender. I set an expectation of providing experiences and perspectives
from a teacher’s viewpoint, positioned myself as an equal among the young participants, and
embraced the necessary struggles of taking on a dual role. In addition to my role as researcher
and teacher in the study, I was equally a full-time teacher, graduate student, and same-sex parent
to a young child. I remained cognizant of my personal biases of being a same-sex parent and
challenged myself to support all viewpoints even those which may not align to my own. As a
full-time teacher, I reflected on the field of teaching and how critical literacy would work in the
classroom. In an attempt to offer evidence-based practices and perceptions to teachers and
researchers about what critical literacy focused on sexuality and gender might look like in the
classroom from my dual perspective, analysis included closely examining the transcripts and the
researcher journal.

137

Overall, two findings were noted on the part of the researcher assuming the role as
teacher. The first finding, Focusing on Power, involved incorporating diverse representations
and calling the participants’ attention to such diverse representations. The second finding,
Teaching Critical Language, included modeling critical language by means of posing questions
as well as encouraging participants to make a personal connection to the story.
Focusing on Power: Incorporate Diverse Texts and Call Attention to Diverse
Representations
The first finding, focusing on power, emerged when examining the data for the ways in
which critical literacy was implemented by the researcher assuming the role as teacher. Through
investigating the missing voices of texts, critical literacy supports examining social issues in
society as well as provides students a better way to understand the connection between language
and power (Comber, 2013; Janks, 1993). Following Comber and Janks’ perspectives, focusing
on power in this study meant to call the participants’ attention toward the diverse representations
in each of the books. Using LGBTQ-themed books allowed the students to observe and read
about different family structures as well as various gender expressions. Six books with at least
one same-sex family representation and six books with characters defying the typical gender
expression were read with the intent of drawing the students’ awareness to these
underrepresented portrayals in society. Incorporating diverse books related to the power issue on
hand, which in this study was sexuality and gender, allowed participants to visualize these
underrepresented characters more concretely and to reflect on how these characters often are
absent in other settings or media: books in the classroom, in the library, on their favorite
television shows, and so forth.

138

Transcripts. In order to raise the participants’ awareness about diverse sexuality and
gender expression by means of critical literacy, it was imperative to incorporate LGBTQ-themed
books into the curriculum. By focusing on the text and examining the message of the author
regarding sexuality and gender, students felt at ease to discuss their thoughts and pose questions
about these topics. In this sense the LGBTQ-themed books functioned as a springboard which
allowed participants to ask questions such as why the author did or did not include certain
representations. Focusing on the author’s purpose removed the pressure of requiring participants
to continually tap into their lived or non-lived experiences in order to discuss sexuality and
gender. Since the LGBTQ representations were essential to identifying the author’s purpose, I
prompted the participants to examine these representations closer to ensure that they did not
overlook these representations or misinterpret the relationship between characters. For instance,
while reading Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011), a story about two mothers who marry each
other, which is concealed until the very end, I directed the participants back to the relationship
between the two women by asking: “So, who are these two people?” In reading books with
multiple family structures, I pointed out the various configurations using explicit descriptions.
For instance, while reading The White Swan Express: A Story about Adoption (Okimoto & Aoki,
2002), I prompted students to examine the different families by stating: “There are different
families in the story: we have a man and a woman, we have two women, and we have a single
woman”. Additionally, I called participants’ attention toward concepts that I thought might be
confusing by soliciting information. For example, with the book, The White Swan Express: A
Story about Adoption, I paused and asked the students to reflect about the meaning of: “you will
meet your new family (20)”. By doing so, I ensured that the participants understood the concept
of adoption and how various families could be formed. Finally by exposing students to diverse

139

books in which we examined topics related to sexuality and gender, students were able to make
connections to other books in the study. Case in point included our last reading of the book,
10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008), in which one of the participants examined the cover and
commented on its similarity with My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010), another book in which the
main character prefers to express oneself in effeminate ways.
Another way in which I called the participants’ attention toward the diversity in these
books was by raising prediction questions to the students prior to reading each of the books. For
example, before reading The Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010), I asked the students to examine the
cover and share their prediction about the story. By doing so, the participants were able to
compare and contrast the actual events of the story to those they predicted. In general, making
predictions with LGBTQ-themed books equally allowed participants to examine and for us to
discuss stereotypical beliefs against the nontraditional views presented in the LGBTQ-themed
books. For instance, certain books, such as The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995) and
Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), challenged students to consider how every princess might
not wish to be married. Overall, this data source revealed that focusing on power was best
completed by incorporating and reading aloud diverse texts accompanied with posing questions
which guaranteed that participants were able to observe various unconventional characters.
Journal. Beginning with the onset of my study, I remained mindful of how Vasquez
(2010) envisions critical literacy by recognizing the power dynamics in books. I wrote notes to
remind myself how Janks (2010) underlines the importance of examining the dominant and
minority voices of texts. After reading the first LGBTQ-theme book to the participants, I
struggled with multiple questions and wrote in my journal:

140

I wish I had seen some examples of how to best enact critical literacy? At what point are
you challenging students’ perspectives to such a degree that they bend? Transformative
thinking is the ultimate goal, but not at the expense of being dogmatic. As a teacher, I
should focus on how changes occur toward the diverse texts and work to raise equity in
the classroom. Critical literacy needs to be about equity on the whole and not enable the
teacher’s view (Journal 11/25/2014).
This passage represents how I felt in regards to initially spotlighting the diverse representations. I
contemplated over what point I should remove the spotlight as well as how long and how strong
should I continue to call the participants’ attention to such diverse representations. I remained
cognizant of my personal biases while still recognizing my role as their teacher working to
construct a critical literacy classroom. Determined to remain focused on the minority voices of
the texts in comparison to the prolific voices represented in society, some of my journal entries
caused me to return to the scholarship in search of how to best enact critical literacy with my
participants. In doing so, I pondered about what types of conversations I should initiate when
critically viewing literacy. After the fourth and fifth week, I struggled a bit with the duality of
my role as a researcher and as a teacher in regards to focusing on power.
I find myself at a crossroad as I want to expand and challenge their views as a researcher,
while still respecting their beliefs about the world. As a teacher, I want them to learn how
to read critically, but not to such a degree that I rob them from the experience of simply
reading a book for pure enjoyment. What does it truly mean to assume the role of a
critical literacy teacher? What does that exactly mean in realms of teaching, educating,
and opening our students’ minds and according to whose views: theirs or mine? (Journal
12/9/2014).

141

I wrestled as the researcher, yearning for students to view the world as an LGBTQ person and
promote equity, while also acknowledging my role as their teacher, and more importantly what
that role would be like for an actual classroom teacher. Overtime, the struggle between the
researcher and the teacher lessened as I fell more into the role as teacher and then equal
participant as a contributor to the critical literacy sessions. The challenge of implementing
critical literacy and my initial concerns of best practices decreased as we continued to read more
LGBTQ-themed books. Directing the participants’ focus toward the diverse representations set a
certain expectation for the readings and allowed the participants and myself to be at ease each
week. By the twelfth week, I noted in my journal how most of the participants were able to
critically analyze texts and naturally sought to understand the relationship between the
characters. Through explicitly reading LGBTQ-themed texts which involved drawing attention
to the diverse representations in the book, I was able to spotlight the characters’ uniqueness by
examining the dominant and minority voices of texts in general with the participants.
In this study, focusing on power meant that students were encouraged to reflect on the
presence and absence of LGBTQ representations across multiple texts. Focusing on power, in
this study, equally paved the way for participants to start considering how superior and inferior
structures of the world are implied in the books we read, and to consider how society should
work to change such dominant representations in order to make texts more inclusive of all
individuals, and not just those regarding diverse sexuality and gender.
Teaching Critical Language: Modeling and Asking Questions
The second finding, teaching critical language, emerged when analyzing the data for how
I enacted critical literacy while assuming the role as teacher. In order for students to be able to
pose and respond to critical questions, Vasquez (2010) highlights that students must first be

142

taught such skills. One of the most effective ways to teach students is through modeling. For this
reason, I modeled how to use critical language by posing critical literacy questions about the
books and then supplied possible responses. Participants learned not only the technique for
critically analyzing books, but also acquired complex language skills focused on examining
power issues.
Transcript. In order to help students develop critical literacy skills, Vasquez (2010)
underscores the importance of empowering students with the language skills necessary to
examine literacy. Doing so meant that I needed to model what critical literacy looked like in
action, which occurred more frequently at the onset of the study. After the first reading, I began
to ask critical literacy questions centered on the author’s purpose for writing the book. I would
commonly ask: “What do you think was the author’s purpose for writing this book?” At the
beginning or when students struggled to find the overall purpose, I would provide scaffolding.
For instance after reading Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), the following exchange occurred
between myself and another non-selected participant within the classroom setting.
Teacher: What do you think was the author’s idea for writing this book?
Participant: Maybe, Miss Smartypants only likes pets.
Teacher: Maybe she does, but I think that the author, the person who wrote the book, did
it because they wanted to say that some people do not want to get married. Just as there
are different families, people can live differently too.
This exchange not only allowed the student asking the question to ponder on how to examine
books differently, but also served as a modeling example for all students. This type of
questioning took place throughout the study and participants were encouraged to critically
examine the books. Posing questions focused on critically examining literacy provided a model

143

for students to not only consider critical elements when reading texts, such as examining the
author’s purpose as well as analyzing the types of proposed representations, but modeling
equally exhibited the language skills necessary to analytically discuss and ask questions
regarding sexuality and gender.
Critical literacy not only focuses on examining the author’s purpose but also how it fits in
relation to society by noticing the missing voices of most texts. Since I purposely selected
alternative texts as a means to spotlight these underrepresented voices, it was imperative that the
participants compared and contrasted the LGBTQ-themed books to other books outside the
research site. Equally, I incorporated a review session which allowed the participants to
reexamine the books in regards to the author’s purpose thereby providing them with multiple
opportunities to study and employ their flourishing critical language skills. I prompted
participants to reflect on how many books portrayed their family and to consider how it might
feel to read books in which you are not present in the story. For instance, after reading two
books, Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011) and Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two Mom Story
(Considine, 2005) which portray a family structure with two mothers, I pose the following
question.
Teacher: Both Donovan and Emma have two mothers. How do you think Donovan and
Emma feel when they read books which do not include their family?
Participant: Sad
By asking these questions in relation to LGBTQ-themed books, participants were encouraged to
reflect about the often invisible voices of same-sex families and children who defy traditional
gender roles.

144

Journal. Starting my journal entries in the footsteps of Vasquez (2010) and Janks (2010)
allowed me to remain focused on the significance of teaching the participants how to use critical
language in order to analyze the power dynamics in texts. During the first part of the study, I
kept writing down Vasquez’s belief about how a teacher’s role is paramount in providing the
necessary language to children in order to discuss complex issues through modeling it. On three
separate occasions, I noted in my journal: “Am I doing this?” I struggled with finding the
balance of how I envisioned the critical literacy sessions with my participants against what they
were capable of delivering. Although Vasquez (2010) asserts that young children are capable of
applying the tenets of critical literacy to texts, my expectations were taunted by having taught
middle school which differed greatly than working with Kindergartners. I contemplated the
importance of explicitly focusing on the power with such a young group, as well as the
importance of explicitly asking and using critical questions to ensure that the participants learned
how to employ critical language skills. I continued to jot down questions about the different
ways I could get students to better understand critical language: Who is the text written for? Who
benefits from the message of this text? What would this story look like from another perspective,
from your perspective? (Journal 12/2/2015).
After the fourth reading, I went back to the literature in search of trying to increase
student engagement in the modeling and questioning process. In doing so, I found a quote from
Wood (2005): “By using critical literacy as a frame….the students viewed literacy connected to
their lived experiences and as a tool which could be used effectively to explore and effect change
in their lives” (p. 11). This quote highlighted the importance of inviting students to make
personal connections while still critically examining books. Since one of the tenets of critical
literacy is transformative thinking, I realized that in order for my students to want to make a

145

change they must first understand the context of the book in relation to their lives, or as Wood
describes “lived experiences” and then in relation to others in order to foster change. Teaching
and using critical language became less problematic over the course of the study; I began to note
that critical questions which focused on both the book and called upon the participant to make a
connection worked best. For instance: Why did the author write this book and what is one or two
things you have in common with the character? (Journal 1/13/2015). Some participants who
wrestled to understand the significance of books were able to connect to the character which in
turn allowed further scaffolding to occur regarding the overall purpose or message of the author.
When making connections appeared challenging for some of my participants, I modeled how all
humans can connect to another by being empathetic. For instance, after reading My Princess Boy
(Kilodavis, 2010), some of the boy participants expressed frustration or resistance in making a
connection to the main character. To model how such a connection could be made despite the
dissimilarities between the readers and the main character, I relied upon human emotion and
discussed how hurtful it was to be ridiculed and to feel alone at school. Modeling empathy
permitted the participants to understand how multiple connections could be made to characters
unlike themselves. As a teacher, I reflected on how critical literacy could be further enhanced
with young children by incorporating the important aspect of human emotion particularly when
reading nontraditional books and equally shared the feeling of what it was like to feel like an
outsider among other individuals. Modeling and posing questions taught participants how to
critically examine books as well as employ complex language skills to discuss issues related to
power.

146

Summary
I worked to position myself first as their teacher, and then an equal participant by
learning and engaging in critical discussions. I embraced the struggles that occurred due to my
dual role and welcomed additional learning opportunities by returning to the scholarship.
In assuming the role as teacher and researcher, I gained knowledge and skill in how to best enact
critical literacy within the classroom with young children. Dedicated to the tenets of how
Vasquez (2010) and Janks (2010) envisioned critical literacy, I remained committed to focusing
on the power dynamics of the dominant versus minority voices in texts. By doing so, data
revealed that focusing on the power meant incorporating diverse literature and calling the
participants’ attention toward the various nontraditional representations in the book. Second, to
engage in critical discussions, it was imperative that participants be exposed and study critical
language. Serving as both teacher and researcher, analysis of the data revealed that teaching
critical language involved modeling and questioning critical language skills as well as
encouraging participants to make personal or empathic connections to the book characters. The
participants demonstrated that critical conversations were not hard to maintain particularly when
given the language skills and opportunity to engage in such conversations. In short, I believe that
critical literacy is a perspective about curriculum and literacies which should encourage students
to connect to their lived experience in order to seek ways to promote acts of social justice,
starting within their own classroom. Page serves as an excellent example of a student promoting
social justice in the classroom by purposely including more representations which reflected her
and her family.

147

Chapter 5
Discussion and Cross-Case Analysis
The first purpose of this study was to focus on how young children respond to LGBTQ
representations within children’s texts and to the topic of sexuality and gender via critical
literacy. In applying a critical literacy approach, three responses observed from the participants
toward LGBT representations were coded as: student rejects, student replicates, or student
recreates. The second purpose of this study, expressed in research question two, was to examine
how the researcher assuming the role as teacher could enact critical literacy with a focus on
sexuality and gender. Two findings were noted in the data. The first finding, focusing on power,
included incorporating diverse texts and calling the participants’ attention to such alternative
representations. The second finding, teaching critical language, entailed modeling critical
language through posing questions and encouraging participants to make personal connections.
In this chapter, the findings are discussed in relation to the two conceptual frameworks —critical
literacy and queer theory— as these pertain to each participant. In addition, this chapter also
includes a discussion related to critical literacy and pedagogy and the researcher taking on the
role of teacher. The chapter ends with a cross-case analysis focused on the three young
participants.
Analysis through a Critical Literacy and Queer Theory Lens
Critical literacy supports studying social issues such as sexuality and gender by
investigating the missing voices of texts (Comber, 2013, 2001). Critical literacy, in this study,
meant observing texts to pinpoint society’s expectations concerning sexuality and gender by
comparing the available dominant discourses in most children’s texts to the alternative texts read

148

aloud in our sessions. In making such comparisons, participants reflected on the connection
between language and power within children’s texts.
Implementing critical literacy required relying on the work of Vasquez’s (2010) critical
literacy work with young children. Application of critical literacy, however, can differ depending
on how teachers define the role of critical literacy. Some teachers may view critical literacy
better suited for focusing on the production of identity as a means for readers to seek and observe
various representations in the literature. Other teachers may regard critical literacy as a means for
readers to examine the construction of subjectivity and to reject the representations offered in the
text. Critical literacy framed solely as the study of identity formation or merely the construction
of subjectivity is problematic (Hagood, 2002). In focusing solely on identity formation, teachers
expose students to various identities and representations as means of understanding that the
produced identities in the text are viable options (Hagood, 2002). This approach may be
problematic in that students learn about categorical markers set by society which may, in turn,
reinforce stereotypical viewpoints. In this study, utilizing children’s books with LGBTQ
representations decreased the likelihood of upholding heteronormative viewpoints. Conversely,
concentrating solely on subjectivity may be equally problematic in that readers are encouraged to
reject meanings of texts in an attempt to define themselves, which occurred more frequently in
this study with diverse gender representations and ethnic differences.
To account for these potential problems, I considered both production of identity and
construction of subjectivity by examining how each participant used the texts as a way to align
with the proposed identities or used subjectivity as a way to push back against the
representations in the texts. In the following pages, examples are provided that demonstrate how
each participant, alternately offered responses which spoke to the production of identity, the

149

construction of subjectivity or demonstrated fluidity and thus offered responses in keeping with
queer theory. Production of identity aligned mostly with the participant responses of Student
Replicates. Participants who replicated the given representations tended to support the identities
supplied in the text and constructed by the author. Construction of subjectivity aligned mostly
with participant responses of Student Recreates and Student Rejects. Participants who rejected or
pushed back from the representations supplied in the text tended to exercise power and negotiate
their understanding of the representations in ways that supported their individual pursuit and
construction and, in certain cases, allowed also transformational thinking to occur.
Finally, given that the study encouraged critical literacy as a means to focus on identity
and subjectivity through the readings of LGBTQ-themed books, participant data was equally
analyzed using the principles of queer theory. I used queer theory to actively deconstruct the
notion of binaries and to put pressure on the conventional norms placed on males and females.
Queer theory supports the process of decentering which entails that one remains fluid by never
fully locating oneself with any single identity. In analyzing the data sources separately,
participants at times offered varying responses to the same text. Such varying responses fall in
line with queer theory in that participants remained fluid and resisted fully locating themselves
with one particular identity regarding sexuality and gender. Examples of participants supplying
varying responses to the same text in relation to sexuality or gender and across various data
sources demonstrate how participants used the decentering process of queer theory.
Page
Production of Identity. Focusing on the production of identity and the formation of
identities in general, Page tended to reproduce certain identities by replicating the main character
or main purpose of the book. Page inclined to mostly resonate with texts which portrayed

150

effeminate boys. Page not only related but also empathized with boys who embraced bodily
performances and garments generally associated with young girls. In reading My Princess Boy
(Kilodavis, 2010) which depicts a boy who enjoys dressing like a princess, Page placed herself in
a similar position by suggesting that people laugh at her when she dresses like a boy. She is
identifying with the main character by putting herself in a likewise situation and acknowledging
the feelings of being ridiculed when one steps outside of the conventional norms.
When asked to identify a way of how she connects to the story of My Princess Boy
(Kilodavis, 2010) Page eagerly responds, “Me and that boy both like to twirl and wear girly
things.” Page replicates this production of identity by understanding societal norms of how boys
and girls are expected to act and dress. Similarly, Page conveys her understanding of what it
feels like to be an outcast by wearing clothes outside of the gender norms as well as associates
herself to the main character through sharing similar performance activities related to girls.
While Page relates to the production of identity placed on girls, she likewise relies on this same
production of identity in order to connect to the diverse representations of effeminate boys to
understand their position and their desire to wear clothing and act similarly to girls.
Page demonstrated similar responses to the three books that portrayed boys defying
conventional roles. First, in her critical literacy drawing for the book 10,000 Dresses (Ewert,
2008), Page illustrated the main character wearing a crystal dress and joyful. Second, she
reflected on how children born as boys, but exhibited gender creativity, might feel by depicting
images of these children being ridiculed in some of her critical literacy drawings. For instance,
after reading The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011), Page drew the main character with pink hair
being mocked by another boy in the story. The identities produced in these texts were not
normative; however, and due to the stereotypical views of how girls should act within society,

151

Page was able to apply this understanding as means to connect to the main characters in these
stories and to identify with their desires to wear dresses and act in ways mostly associated to
girls. Page not only empathized with the effeminate characters or characters identifying with the
opposite sex in the texts, but also placed herself in a similar position as means of identifying with
being teased when not conforming to the gender societal norms.
Similarly, Page’s identification with princesses and the traditional expectation that
princesses should get married appeared in her pre-assessment picture and in her photographs. For
instance, Page took eight photographs of texts that replicated traditional roles of men and
women. In each of the photographs, Page captured a stereotypical image of a young girl or an
older Princess. For instance, Fancy Nancy and the Posh Puppy (O’Conner, 2013) portrays a
young girl who often wears tutus and tiaras while two other books, I Love to Sing (Matheson,
2014) and I’m a Pretty Little Black Girl! (Bynum & Parod, 2013) includes images of young girls
who like to sing, to dance, and to twirl and who primarily wear pink garments throughout the
books. The above books demonstrate an intersection of race and gender in that Page
demonstrates both her identity as a girl as well as an African-American. The remaining five
photographs captured texts portraying older females seeking or being courted into male
companionship. Each of these photos included texts containing a princess adorned in typical
princess attire wishing to fall in love with a prince. Page’s pre-assessment drawing also
contained a similar representation in that she drew a picture of Snow White wearing a long
yellow dress that ultimately wakes up from a kiss delivered from her prince charming. In
examining these various data points, Page appeared to identify deeply with the societal norms of
what it means be a princess, both in regards to attire and to seeking companionship. In contrast to
the societal norm which offers greater representations of girl princesses versus boy princesses,

152

Page demonstrated that the identity production of princesses is not limited by gender by
depicting representations of both girl and boy princesses in study. Similarly to the societal norm,
Page reproduced the identity and expectations involving gender performance, particular with
females, and matrimony by initially resisting diverse representations.
Another way in which critical literacy focusing on the production of identity and
identities, in general, occurred with Page was when focusing on the identity of families. When
reading Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011) a story about a boy who is excited to participate in
the wedding of his two moms, Page suggested that she too might have another mom in China.
Although Page’s family consists of a separated mother and father, Page identifies with the main
character’s position by pretending to have a second mother. Page does not reject the idea of
having two mothers. Page’s viewpoint about alternative families remains consistent when
reading King & King & Family (de Haan &Nijland, 2004) in that she states that the author wrote
the book because he is a king and likes his family; yet, Page did not portray families with two
fathers in her critical literacy drawings. Page’s understanding about family differences resurfaces
in her critical literacy drawing of The Family Book (Parr, 2010) in which she replicated an
illustration from book of a family living in two separate households. According to Page, the
identity production of families is not heterosexually limiting or limited to one particular
household.
Construction of Subjectivity. Critical literacy also focuses on the construction of
subjectivity, which enables readers to construct themselves into existence by pushing back on
certain representations found in texts (Hagood, 2002; Alvermann & Hagood, 2000; Fuery, 1995).
Page negotiated herself into being by rejecting or recreating the main character or main purpose
of the books in various ways. The best example of Page constructing herself into being occurred

153

when reading Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986). In this book, the main character, a princess,
does not wish to be married despite the numerous suitors who perform treacherous tasks in order
to gain her love. Instead of acknowledging the princess’s desire to remain unwed, Page felt that
the author wrote the book to demonstrate how ill-mannered the princess was by requiring her
suitors to complete impossible tasks. In this sense, Page rejects the author’s purpose which
illustrates that some princesses prefer to remain single. Page directs her attention on the
challenges placed on the suitors versus on the princess resisting the societal urge to marry a
prince. Through critical discussions and reading other similar books, Page begins to reflect on
how some people prefer not to get married. As a result, when reviewing Princess Smartypants
for a second time to reflect on why the author wrote the book, Page declared “because some
people don’t want to get married.” Critical discussions and exposure to a princess seeking
autonomy allowed Page to expand her viewpoint from believing that the author’s purpose was
based on being impolite and testing people to acknowledging that not everyone seeks to be
married. Page replicated this expanded viewpoint after reading a likeminded book, The Paper
Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995) in which a princess at the end of the story decides not to marry the
prince. Page examined the construction of princesses in these books seeking autonomy and
initially rejected this viewpoint. In this sense, Page exercised power and agency as subject by
navigating and constructing her positionality regarding the expectations of princesses. Although
Page ultimately considers this alternative viewpoint about princesses, initially it is met with
rejection until she is able to construct this knowledge in a way that makes sense to her and who
she imagines herself to be.
Another way in which the construction of subjectivity occurred was through the wavering
recognition of families with two fathers. Though Page offered verbal support, her critical literacy

154

drawings portrayed another perspective of families with two fathers. For instance, after reading
the book King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004) Page illustrates one of the kings
getting bitten by a mosquito. In reading the third and final book, A Tale of Two Daddies
(Oelschalger, 2010) which portrays two fathers and their daughter, Page’s critical literacy
drawing excludes both fathers. During the reading of this book, Page demanded the name of the
little girl which is not offered until the end of the book. An explanation was given describing
that, as readers, we do not know the name of the girl since the focus of the book is placed on the
girl having two fathers, unlike most other books which portray a mother and a father. On this
note, others readers might view the fact that the girl does not have a name as a major flaw in the
text. Other readers might also debate the ethnicity of the child in the book as it is not entirely
evident. The representation of the girl could equally speak to African-Americans, Latinos and
Latinas, or a child with olive skin tone. Some readers might consider that perhaps the authors did
not initially attach a name to the girl character in order to speak to and represent a larger
readership. Both reader interpretations hold value and the girl character is given a name at the
end of the book as Princess Daisy. What is highly debatable is the notion that the authors, de
Haan and Nijland, consciously defaced the girl character, as these authors have written other
LGBTQ-themed books as a way to bring greater visibility to LGBTQ individuals and families.
For this reason, when Page asked about the girl’s name, her focus was redirected toward the
diverse family structure. During a review, later in the week, participants were asked to state the
characters we read about the previous week, a question to which Page quickly responds, “the
daddies.” Such a response demonstrated how Page initially pushed back from the representations
of two fathers but was able to shift her focus on understanding the significant role that the fathers
played in the story.

155

Similar to Page’s viewpoint about princesses seeking autonomy, Page tended to reject the
representation of two fathers until she was able to construct this knowledge in terms suitable to
her and in turn vocalize that the fathers were the main focus of the story in later sessions.
The final example of Page exercising power and agency as a subject in order to construct
herself within the context of a text involved inserting her cultural heritage into three of her
critical literacy drawings and in the post-assessment drawing. This insertion is not in line with
sexuality or gender, but it does suggest that Page understood the aspects of applying the tenets of
critical literacy by being able to in turn use this knowledge to include elements which were
important to her. Page tended to insert elements of her heritage by drawing the story characters
with brown skin or depicting them with African-American hair.
Queer Theory. Page benefited from the principles of queer theory by being able to
decenter her viewpoints in an attempt to remain fluid. The best example of Page demonstrating
her ability to use texts to identify, reflect on, or push back on the various sexual and gender
representations occurred while reading the King & King & Family (de Haan and Nijland, 2004).
In reading this text, Page applies her understanding of critical literacy to state that the author
might have written the book to illustrate how the two kings are proud of their family. In this
sense, Page not only replicates the author’s purpose of the story, but also uses critical literacy to
pinpoint that the purpose of the book is about alternative families. Page’s critical literacy
drawing of this book portrays another perspective in that she only illustrates one king who is
annoyed by a mosquito. By doing so, Page redirects her focus away from the author’s purpose,
which was an alternative family or depicting both kings with the child, and places it instead on a
secondary element in the story. In reading this book, Page demonstrates two varying responses in
the transcripts and in the critical literacy drawing. By not aligning to one particular side of the

156

binary, heterosexual families versus homosexual families, Page’s viewpoint regarding families
with two fathers could be viewed as fluid and thus makes it less likely to situate herself on either
side of the binary.
Jerry
Production of Identity. Focusing on the production of identity and the formation of
identities in general, Jerry tended to replicate certain identities by duplicating the main character
or main purpose of specific books. Jerry mostly aligned with texts about families, particularly
books which included fathers. Jerry offered several verbal responses acknowledging his positive
viewpoint about all types of family structures. For instance, while reading the last page of The
Family Book (Parr, 2010): “Your family is special no matter what kind it is (p.29), Jerry shouts
out, “that’s just what I was going to say. I want a copy.” This type of response exhibits that Jerry
had few reservations about the various families represented in the book, including families with
two mothers and two fathers. Jerry’s critical literacy drawing for this book also included a
diverse family representation in that he depicted a single mother kissing her son goodnight. Jerry
continued to show his acceptance toward diverse family structures in which Jerry supported
alternative family roles after reading Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two Mom Story (Considine,
2005). When asked why the author might have written the book, Jerry spotlighted the two moms
and declared that everyone should read it. Jerry’s reactions did not waver when asked in a later
time about Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two Mom Story and he delivered the exact same
response.
Jerry’s acceptance of all types of families was equally visible in his collection of
photographs. Jerry took an equal amount of photographs challenging as well as supporting
traditional roles in relation to sexuality and gender. For instance, Jerry took eight photos which

157

replicated the traditional role of men and women in relation to both sexuality and gender. All of
the books in this set contained a main character raised in a heterosexual family. In contrast, Jerry
also captured eight pictures of books, DVDs, or characters that did not portray stereotypical roles
of men and women in relation to gender or sexuality.
Finally, Jerry’s pre- and post-assessment drawings reflect a change from first
representing a heterosexual family of a mother, a father, and a girl, to drawing a smiling monster
with three bloody scratches. Although his post-assessment drawing does not portray an
alternative family, it does evade all classifications by constructing a creature in which sexuality
and gender categorizing are absent.
Although Jerry tended to show little opposition toward representations of all types of
families, he mostly gravitated toward representations with two fathers. While reading the King &
King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004), Jerry made a comment about how all kings should
get married. Jerry displayed no resistance toward either the two men marrying one another or the
concept of the two men adopting a little girl. During the reading of A Tale of Two Daddies
(Oelschlager, 2010), another book about two fathers and their daughter, Jerry identities the
characters on the cover and labels them as two dads and a kid. This comment shows that before
reading the story, Jerry easily envisions this type of family structure. Jerry continues to embrace
this family of two fathers by making a personal connection to it. Jerry compares the actions of
his father and to those in the book and shares, “My dad stays up late, he doesn’t tell me stories,
but he just watches TV.”
In light of how Jerry voluntarily made personal connections to these books and willingly
shared his thoughts with stories portraying two fathers versus two mothers, Jerry’s responses
suggest that books with two fathers resonated more with him than books with two mothers.

158

Jerry was more receptive to the concept of alternative families and relationships versus the
notion that males could express themselves in nontraditional ways through attire or performance.
This type of data further demonstrates how diverse gender expression is a harder construct for
children to accept versus diverse sexuality. Likewise, the data underscores how gender is a
construct that children struggle to comprehend but seek understanding around what it means to
be a man and woman, not only in society but in also how gender applies to their own being.
According to Jerry, the identity production of families was not limited by heterosexually or
homosexuality, but having at least one father or two appeared to be the most appealing family
representation.
Initially, Jerry linked the concept of being a princess to only girls. This linkage is not
unexpected given the many representations of girls dressed as princesses and adorned in the
color pink. Uniquely enough, Jerry’s resistance to princesses and to the color pink allowed Jerry
to connect to the character in a story we read. In the book, Olivia and the Fairy Princess
(Falconer, 2012), Olivia questions her parents as to why everyone wants to be a pink princess
instead of desiring to be other things, such as an African princess or a warthog. Jerry’s critical
literacy drawing of this book included Olivia wearing the color pink and crying. This picture not
only replicates the main character, but also the theme of the book in that Olivia fought the notion
that girls should only wear pink. The production and identity of a girl rejecting the representation
of a pink princess is abnormal, yet this resistance allowed Jerry to relate to the character, Olivia,
by equally resisting such representations. The societal production of princesses and of girls
wearing mostly pink aided Jerry in realizing how some girls may equally experience a similar
sentiment as he does as well as to connect with others who hold likeminded viewpoints across all
genders.

159

Construction of Subjectivity. Jerry navigated himself into existence in relation to
critical literacy and the construction of subjectivity by pushing back on and questioning the
representations in texts through rejecting or by recreating the main character or main purpose of
book in various ways. The best example of Jerry negotiating himself and his viewpoint occurred
through pushing back on representations of princesses or items typically related to girls. Jerry’s
first rejection to a book occurred with Olivia and the Fairy Princess (Falconer, 2012). Before
reading this book, Jerry assumed that the book must be for girls since it focused on princesses.
His assessment about princesses being relevant to only girls was challenged when we read My
Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010), a book in which the main character, the Princess Boy, wears
dresses and tiaras. Jerry resisted this representation and offered an explanation to other
participants as to why other children were laughing at the Princess Boy, suggesting that people,
in general, laugh at boys who have an affinity for playing with objects stereotypically associated
with girls. Jerry continued to resist this representation of the Princess Boy when he portrayed the
Princess Boy in his critical literacy drawing with laceration wounds.
Critical discussions and exposure to other gender diverse representations of princesses
allowed Jerry to expand his viewpoint and to consider how mocking someone for their gender
difference was an unkind gesture. As a result, when reading The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton,
2011), and 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008), Jerry’s resistance decreased. Critical discussions
revolving around color associations for boys and girls as well as understanding various ways
people express or identify with the different gender caused Jerry to inquire why some characters
in the book, The Boy with Pink Hair, were mocking the boy, but not the girl who also had pink
hair. This inquiry illustrates that Jerry acknowledged that having pink hair is different and that
laughing at only the boy and not the girl was a biased response. Jerry’s critical drawings also

160

demonstrated how he negotiated toward his understanding that some boys prefer to wear pink as
well as feminine clothing. Unlike his drawing of the Princess Boy with lacerations, Jerry
depicted the boy entirely in pink including clothes, hair, and facial features. Additionally, he
portrayed the main character in 10,000 Dresses, Bailey, as a child born as a boy, but identifies as
a girl, by wearing a crystal dress. Jerry examined the construction of what it meant to be a boy in
these books who defied the traditional roles and initially rejected this construction. Jerry
exercised power and agency by navigating and constructing his positionality with regard to the
expectations society holds for boys. Ultimately, Jerry was able to construct knowledge which
included both boys and girls wearing pink and dressing in unconventional ways, and more
importantly, considered mocking others as an unjust response.
Another way in which Jerry navigated his subjectivity through the texts by pushing back
on and questioning certain heteronormative representations occurred in relation to the topic of
marriage. Jerry was introduced to the notion that not all people wish to marry while reading
Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), a book that portrays a princess who wishes to remain single
and consequently outsmarts all of her suitors. During the reading, Jerry questions why the suitors
agree to perform such dangerous feats to win the princess’s hand. Jerry thus neglects to realize
the princess’s plan to claim her independence by outsmarting the suitors and instead focuses on
the suitors’ heroic tactics. Critical discussions based on getting married or remaining single,
Jerry draws the final scene in the book which consists of the princess kissing the suitor who then
transforms into a toad. Although Jerry struggles with why the suitors would agree to perform
multiple dangerous feats rather than considering the princess’s objective, his critical literacy
picture places equal importance on both characters by drawing the princess kissing the toad.

161

An interesting twist occurred when reading The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995) in
which another princess decides not to marry a prince and happily departs unwed at the end of the
story. In this book, the princess saves her soon to wed prince who is captured by a dragon at the
beginning of the book. Once the prince is rescued, he insults the princess based on her dirty
garments causing the princess to reflect on his ungratefulness and leave him. As a result, the
princess departs in the sunset alone and happy. The purpose of both books is to demonstrate that
people can be content being alone, and that not every princess needs a prince or vice versa.
Instead of acknowledging the rudeness of the prince and how the princess realizes she would be
happier without him, Jerry considers the impolite actions of the prince as a means to nullify his
marriage to the princess. This interpretation is unlikely on the part of the author; however,
Jerry’s perspective also could be accurate in that it might be the prince seeking liberation in a
similar fashion as the princess in Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986). To illustrate what Jerry felt
was the most important concept of the book, he drew an enormous caterpillar that is sleeping
after the princess has strategically exhausted him in an attempt to enter the castle unharmed and
rescue the prince.
Although Jerry does replicate the princess outsmarting the dragon, it is unclear as to why
he recreates the dragon into a caterpillar. Jerry tended to reject representations which expressed
women seeking to live autonomously. Over the course of study he resisted these representations
less, thereby allowing him to process and to construct this knowledge in ways that permitted him
to consider how both men and women might prefer to live solitary lives and thus examine the
construction of marriage in ways that made sense to him.
Queer Theory. The benefits of queer theory, which encourages individuals to decenter
and deconstruct their viewpoints in order to remain fluid and resist binary thinking, occurred

162

with Jerry. An example of Jerry employing his ability to utilize texts to identify or push back on
the various sexual and gender representations took place when the class read Olivia and the
Fairy Princess (Falconer, 2012). In first reading this text, Jerry demonstrates resistance to the
text as he viewed the book portraying activities commonly related to girls, the representations of
princesses exist throughout the book. The main purpose of the book is to question why both boys
and girls gravitate toward the representation of a pink princess versus taking on other
representations such as African queens or Indian princesses. In this sense, Jerry rejects the notion
of the book on the premise of the title and the illustrations included, and before fully
understanding the message of the book. Jerry’s critical literacy drawing of this book portrays
another perspective in that he illustrates Olivia, the main character, wearing pink and crying.
Jerry not only replicated the author’s purpose of the story in his drawing, but also uses critical
literacy to understand that some girls might not identify with the color pink or have the desire to
be a princess. By reading this book, Jerry exhibits two varying responses in the transcripts and in
the critical literacy drawing. In doing so, Jerry resists aligning to a particular binary by first
associating girls to the color pink and the desire to be a princess in the transcripts to depicting
Olivia wearing pink and crying. Jerry’s contrasting viewpoint about associating all girls with the
color pink and the desire to be a princess remains fluid and makes it impossible to situate him on
either side of the binary.
Hank
Production of Identity. Critical literacy with the focus on the production of identity
while reading LGBTQ-themed books occurred in relation to both gender and sexuality. Hank
replicated the identities supplied to him in the texts by reproducing the author’s purpose or main
character of the books. Hank tended to align with books which spotlighted a same-sex family. In

163

reading Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011), a book about two mothers seeking matrimony
with their son as the ring bearer, the marriage between the two mothers is concealed to the reader
until the final two pages of the story. Hank surmises that a marriage is about to take place and
mimics the gesture of opening a white box on one knee and does not resist the representation of
the two women by offering any negative comments or disapproving body gestures. Hank does
not offer any opposition to this family structure which is supported by his critical literacy
drawing of the boy, Donovan, standing between his two mothers on their wedding day.
Hank shows further acceptance of diverse family structures after reading A Tale of Two
Daddies (Oelschlager, 2010). When asked if one of the participants could recall last week’s
book, Hank states the title of this book and makes a text-to-life connection by linking it to twin
girls in the school who have two fathers. The final example of Hank not resisting such
representations occurred when reading King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004), a
story about two kings honeymooning in a jungle who return to find a young girl in their suitcase
whom they later adopt. While reading the story, Hank discovers that the young girl is hiding and
following the kings throughout their journey. His critical literacy drawing includes both the kings
standing on a bridge in the jungle. This drawing suggests that Hank felt comfortable about samesex family representations and the identities produced in these texts by replicating these
representations through his words and in drawings. Although Hank did reject a book, The Family
Book (Parr, 2010), about diverse families which included same-sex representations in his critical
drawing, it might be possible that Hank needed explicit representations instead of being exposed
to a variety of family structures. According to Hank, overall the identity production of families is
not heterosexually limiting and can equally consist of two moms or two dads.

164

Similarly, Hank tended to align with books which portrayed princesses seeking their
autonomy and fighting the societal pressure to marry a prince. While reading Princess
Smartypants (Cole, 1986), Hank interrupts the reading to predict the final sentence in the book.
By doing so, Hank predicts that the princess will live ever after without the companionship of a
prince. Hank offers the same response when reading The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995)
which portrays a princess who chooses autonomy over marrying the prince in the story. His
critical literacy drawing also aligns to the theme in that Hank depicted the dragon that the
princess outsmarted in order to save the prince. Hank describes his pictures as the dragon
engulfing the princesses’ clothes. Hank’s picture represents an actual event in the story which
causes the princess to wear a paper bag in the rest of the story after the dragon has synched her
clothes. This data shows that, according to Hank, the identity production of princesses does not
entail marrying a prince and in fact some princesses may achieve greater happiness by remaining
unwed.
Hank equally replicated representations of both boys and girls wearing multiple colors
across the gender spectrum and thus did not seem to subscribe to the ideology that certain colors
are for girls and other colors are for boys. While reading The Boy with Pink Hair (Hilton, 2011)
which represents the main character, a boy, with pink hair, Hank declares that the boy has pink
hair because he likes the color and because there are no gender specific colors. This comment
demonstrates that Hank has a nontraditional viewpoint regarding colors and feels comfortable in
replicating the main theme of the book which is to celebrate everyone’s uniqueness. Hank’s
critical literacy drawing for this book includes the main character with purple hair versus pink. It
is unclear as to why Hank opted for the color purple, yet it is interesting that Hank selected a
color which is typically associated with mostly girls. Although, as noted in the transcripts, Hank

165

claims not to subscribe to any gender specific colors, he appears to demonstrate his
understanding of societal preferences by selecting another color associated with girls to depict
the boy’s hair. Hank’s receptiveness toward receiving these diverse representations and thus
identities toward girls and boys wearing multiple colors resurfaced when reading Olivia and the
Fairy Princesses (Falconer, 2012). In this book, Olivia, a pig, questions why both girls and boys
desire to be pink princesses. Olivia feels that children should choose other representations to
emulate. Hank connects to this story and replicates the story’s theme in his critical literacy
drawing. Similar to an illustration in the book, Hank draws Olivia wearing a warthog costume to
a Halloween party. This picture not only replicates the main character but also the main theme in
that Olivia took pleasure in trying on nontraditional representations. In this sense, the identity
production of boys and girls and their color preferences are not limited by gender and thus all
colors are genderless according to Hank.
Hank’s photographs could not be included since the roll of film produced blank pictures.
Hank’s pre- and post- assessment pictures do not depict any characters that could be classified as
homosexual or heterosexual nor did he portray the characters as acting or asserting themselves to
one particular gender. Hank evades all classifications by constructing characters in which
sexuality and gender are absent.
Construction of Subjectivity. Construction of subjectivity, which involves readers
working to construct themselves into existence by pushing back on certain representations,
occurred in various ways for Hank. First, although Hank claimed that colors were genderless, he
tended to resist representations of boy princesses. In asking Hank to share one thing he had in
common with the Princess Boy, he avoided the question and stated, “I will draw him without the
princess things.” Initially, Hank resisted categorical markers which pertained to gender for both

166

boys and girls, but when exposed to a boy desiring to be a princess, Hank rejects such a
representation. His critical literacy drawing for this book consists of the Princess Boy in several
different Halloween costumes: Easter bunny, spider, ant, and butterfly. Hank consciously
rejected the dresses and tiaras worn by the main character, but he also did not portray the
Princess Boy in typical boy attire. By doing so, Hank recreates the Princess Boy wearing several
genderless animal creations. During the last reading, 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008) which
portrays a character born as a boy, but identifies as a girl, dreaming about dresses, Hank supplies
little responses, except when asked if he can recall other people like this main character. Hank
not only offers an affirmative response, but also connects it to the book My Princess Boy
(Kilodavis, 2010). This connection demonstrates that Hank understood the similarities between
the main characters in these two books and, unlike the reading of My Princess Boy, he did not
reject this final main character. In this example, Hank exercised power and agency as subject by
navigating and constructing his final position about diverse gender expression.
Another way in which Hank pushed back on certain representations and constructed
characters to his own liking occurred through changing the sex of the character. For instance,
after reading A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschalger, 2010), a story about two fathers and their
daughter, Hank recreates the family with two fathers and their son in his critical literacy drawing.
Hank repeats this pattern when reading The White Swan Express: A Story about Adoption
(Okimoto & Aoki, 2002) in which the story includes several different families traveling to China
to adopt infant girls. For this critical literacy drawing, Hank draws only the children, but as boys
and older. This type of transformation of the sex from girls to boys could suggest that such a
representation makes the most sense to Hank given that he has a twin brother and no other
siblings.

167

The final example of Hank constructing the characters or themes to his own liking
involved inserting animal associations into his comments or drawings. While reading King &
King & Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004) Hank responds that the author wrote the book because
people like pets. Hank’s comment is most likely influenced by the various animals represented in
this book as the two kings honeymoon in a jungle. This comment suggests that although Hank
replicated many parts of the story which demonstrated support for same-sex families, he equally
felt that the animals played an important role in the story. Animal representations reappear in
two of his critical literacy drawings. After reading The Family Book (Parr, 2010), which portrays
various family structures, Hank’s drawing included a monkey hanging in a tree and an alligator
lying in a hammock. Hank describes the two animals as playing hide-n-seek and does not make
any association to families. Another example occurs after reading Princess Smartypants (Cole,
1986). Instead of depicting the princess or the multiple suitors fighting for the princess’s hand,
Hank draws a picture of unrecognizable creatures eating alongside an enormous alligator
wearing shoes. This representation is in contrast to other data sources about this book which
suggested that Hank understood the importance of the princess seeking autonomy. Similarly this
book also included several pictures of animals. The final example pertaining to Hank’s tendency
to focus on animals involves the book Emma and Meesha My Boy: A Two Mom Story
(Considine, 2005), a book about a young girl, Emma, who plays with her cat while her two
moms teach her how to be respectful of the animal’s needs. Hank’s critical literacy drawing
includes a picture of an angry cat, although the cat does not rebel or act unkindly to Emma.
While these animal insertions are not in line with sexuality or gender, it does suggest that Hank
comprehended and felt comfortable to apply the tenets of critical literacy in order to include
elements that were significant to him.

168

Queer Theory. Queer theory calls upon individuals to decenter themselves by means of
deconstructing their viewpoints about particular concepts in order to remain fluid and open to all
possibilities. An example of Hank demonstrating his ability to identify or push back on the
various sexual and gender representations occurred when reading Princess Smartypants (Cole,
1986). For instance, while reading this text, Hank interrupts to predict the final sentence in the
book which declares that the princess will live ever after in peace and in autonomy from other
suitors. Hank’s prediction is not only correct, but also signifies that he understood the desires of
the main character. In answering the critical literacy question of what surprised him the most
about this book, Hank’s comment refers to the final illustration in the book which shows the
princess holding up a celebratory drink. Instead of stating that the princess has evaded the
obligation of marriage, Hank recreates the final scene by discussing the pose of the princess.
Although Hank does not verbally acknowledge why the princess is elated, he does remark on her
final sentiment. Lastly, Hank’s critical literacy drawing of this book paints another perspective as
he illustrates bizarre creatures eating next to a huge alligator wearing shoes. In reading this book,
Hank demonstrated a range of responses in the transcripts to the critical literacy drawings
regarding the significance of marriage. Hank’s varying viewpoints about the theme or main
character may have made it difficult to fully situate himself in relation to this book.
Teacher and Researcher
Production of Identity. Since critical literacy requires an equal examination of the
production of identity, I examined the ways in which I reproduced certain identities within the
classroom. Examination included focusing on instruction which allowed participants to
understand how identities are produced in texts and made available to them. One of the most
significant ways in which participants were able to examine the production of identities was

169

though reading LGBTQ-themed books. Using children’s books with alternative representations
allowed the students to analyze and read about various family structures, including same-sex
families, and a range of gender expression. Six books included at least one same-sex family and
six books portrayed characters defying typical gender expectations. While incorporating and
exposing participants to diverse representations was necessary, it was equally imperative that
critical discussions take place in order to allow participants to construct meaning about the
diverse representations outside of the societal norm. To make certain that participants did not
overlook these representations or misconstrue the relationships between characters, I directed the
participants to examine the representations closer. While reading Donovan’s Big Day (Newman,
2011), a story about two mothers marrying each other, I brought the participants’ attention back
to the relationship of the two mothers and asked, “So who are these two people?” I highlighted
the various configurations using explicit descriptions while reading books with multiple family
structures.
The participants’ attention was directed toward the diversity in these books by raising
prediction questions prior to reading. For instance, before reading The Princess Boy (Kilodavis,
2010), I asked the students to observe and share their prediction about the story. The participants
were able to compare and contrast the actual events in the story to their predictions. Making
predictions with LGBTQ-themed books allowed participants to consider their viewpoints against
the nontraditional views presented in the LGBTQ-themed books. For instance, certain books,
such as The Paper Bag Princess (Munsch, 1995) and Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), caused
students to consider how every princess might not want to marry.
Second, empowering students with the proper language skills to examine LGBTQ
representations spotlighted the production of identities. In order for students to learn this

170

approach, it was necessary that I model what critical literacy looked like in action. Commencing
with the first reading, I integrated critical literacy questions into the discussion by focusing on
the author’s purpose for writing the book. Commonly, I asked, “What do you think was the
author’s purpose for writing this book?” When students struggled to identify the overall purpose,
I provided scaffolding. This type of scaffolding demonstrated to students how to examine books
differently. Posing questions focused on critically examining literacy provided a model for
students to not only consider critical elements while reading, but also exhibited the necessary
language skills to analytically discuss topics from various perspectives. I selected alternative
texts as a means to highlight these underrepresented voices which equally required that
participants compare and contrast these books to those outside the research site. Weekly review
sessions allowed participants to reexamine the books in regards to the author’s purpose which
provided them with several occasions to examine and utilize their blooming critical language
skills.
Construction of Subjectivity. The construction of subjectivity requires readers to
reexamine themselves in relation to the representations in texts by pushing back and constructing
themselves into being. As their teacher, I allowed students to reconstruct themselves by focusing
on power and through teaching critical language skills. Through focusing on the power by
means of incorporating diverse texts and calling the participants’ attention toward LGBTQ
representations, I remained cognizant of my personal biases while recognizing my role as a
critical literacy teacher who actively seeks to bring equality to the LGBTQ community. I
struggled with the duality of my role as a researcher and teacher focusing on power. I posed
questions such as: What does it mean to assume the role of a critical literacy teacher in relation to
teaching, educating, and expanding students’ minds and according to whose views: theirs or

171

mine? These challenges decreased as I continued to read Janks (2010, 1993) who underlines the
importance of examining the dominant and minority voices of texts. Focusing on power, in
relation to construction of subjectivity, meant that students were encouraged to consider the issue
of access as a means to comprehend how unequal power structures and societal expectations are
implied in the books we read, and to consider how society should work to change such dominant
representations to make texts more inclusive of all individuals.
In teaching critical language skills, I made multiple inquiries about how to best teach
critical language skills to young participants while still allowing them to construct themselves
into existence in relation to the texts. To remain focused on the task, I wrote about how
Vasquez’s (2010) perspective on the teacher’s role to model as paramount in providing children
the necessary language skills in discussing complex issues successfully. I wrestled with how I
had envisioned the critical literacy sessions against what they were capable of delivering. I
reflected on the importance of explicitly focusing on the power with such a young group, as well
as importance of explicitly asking and using critical questions to guarantee that the participants
understood how to best use critical language skills. In doing so, I took notes about questions I
could ask participants in simple and understandable ways: Who is this text written for, and what
would this story look like from another perspective, from your perspective?
Another way in which participants were encouraged to construct their identities as
independent subjects and readers of alternative texts was through allowing participants to make
personal connections to the texts. Wood (2005) notes that students should view literacy as
connected to their lived experiences and as a tool, which could be used effectively to foster
change in their lives. When making connections appeared challenging for some participants, I
modeled how, as readers, we could connect to characters through empathy. For instance, after

172

reading, My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010), some of the boy participants grappled with making
a connection to the main character. I modeled how a connection could be made despite the
dissimilarities between the reader and the main character, by relying on human emotion and
discussing how it feels to be bullied or ridiculed by others. Modeling empathy permitted
participants to understand how connections are possible with characters unlike ourselves.
Through relying on shared emotions or making personal connections participants were able to
construct themselves in relation to the texts in ways that were applicable to their lives.
In sum, the construction of identity and the production of identity on the part of the
teacher involved remaining focused on the power, both in relation to the teacher’s beliefs and to
those of the students. Second, it equally involved teaching critical language skills through means
of modeling and asking questions which supported the tenets of critical literacy as well as
allowing participants to make connections to the texts in ways that encouraged them to exercise
and power and assert agency as readers.
Cross-Case Analysis
The purpose of conducting a cross-case analysis in most studies is to enhance
generalizability through deeper analysis and explanation (Miles & Huberman, 1994), since this
study consisted of a small group of participants, claiming generalizability is not possible. The
greater purpose of conducting a cross-case analysis of this study was to provide teachers and
researchers with additional information regarding the types of themes which may surface when
addressing topics of sexuality and gender via critical literacy with young children. Before
collectively analyzing the cases, Miles and Huberman (1994) assert that it is imperative to first
understand the dynamics of each particular case prior to delineating cross-case explanations. The
findings focused exclusively on each participant and each participant’s responses were

173

additionally analyzed through a theoretical lens in relation to critical literacy and queer theory.
By doing so, rich and descriptive data produced patterns of similarities and differences yielding
to a deeper understanding across the cases.
Included in this section are similarities and differences across the cases. Four similarities
as well as two differences were noted among the participants in the data. Similarities among the
participants included: (1) family is not heterosexually or homosexually limiting, (2) questioning
the concept of not wanting to marry, (3) resisting representations of princesses, particularly boy
princesses and (4) using critical literacy to insert individual and meaningful topics into one’
work. The two overarching differences among the participants were: (1) the individual and
unique views about family structures and (2) the participants’ views according to color
preferences and gender. Discussed in more detail are the findings noted in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 in
relation to the participants’ similarities and differences.
Table 5.1
Cross-Case Analysis
Participant Similarities
______________________________________________________________________________
Participants: Page, Jerry, and Hank
 Family is not heterosexually or homosexually limiting
Participants: Jerry and Page
 Questioned concept of not wanting to marry
Participants: Jerry and Hank
 Resist representations of princesses, particularly boy princesses
Participants: Page and Hank
 Using Critical Literacy to insert individual and meaningful topics into their work
o Page- African-American traits in Critical Literacy Drawings
o Hank- Altering girls into boys and inserting animals in Critical Literacy
Drawings
______________________________________________________________________________

174

Table 5.2
Cross-Case Analysis
Participant Differences
______________________________________________________________________________
Participants: Page, Jerry, and Hank
 Page- less receptive to families with two dads
 Jerry- preference to families with two dads
 Hank- depicted families with sons versus daughters
Participants: Jerry and Hank
 Jerry- specific colors for certain genders
 Hank- colors are genderless
______________________________________________________________________________
Similarities
The first similarity observed among all the participants was the notion that family is not
heterosexually or homosexually limiting. Some ways in which Page shows support of alternative
families appears after reading King & King & Family (de Haan & Nijland), a story of two kings
honeymooning who return home and adopt a girl hiding in their suitcase, by stating that the
author wrote the book because he is a king and likes his family. Another example, occurs after
reading Donovan’s Big Day (Newman, 2011), a book about a marriage between two moms and
their son, the ring bearer, when Page suggests that she might have a second mother in China.
Page does not elaborate on the active role that the second mother would take in her life
considering that the other mother lives in China, but Pages does demonstrate that she is receptive
to queering the idea of family and that multiple mothers are possible. Like Page, Jerry does not
demonstrate any resistance toward same-sex families. Some ways in which Jerry illustrates
support of diverse families occurs while reading The Family Book (Parr, 2010), which spotlights
various family structures including two moms and two dads; after reading “Your family is

175

special no matter what kind it is (29), Jerry shouts out “that’s just what I was going to say. I want
a copy.”
Another way Jerry showed support of same-sex families occurred before and during the
reading of A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschlager, 2010). Jerry not only made a personal
connection to the book by comparing his father to those in the book, he also identified the
characters on the cover as a family consisting of two dads and a kid before our read aloud
session. Hank, also demonstrated that family is not heterosexually or homosexually limiting.
Ways in which Hank exhibited support of alterative families during the reading of Donovan’s
Big Day included mimicking the gesture of opening the wedding ring box, not offering any
negative comments, and drawing Donovan with his two mothers in his critical literacy drawing.
Another way Hank showed support of diverse families was by making a text-to life-connection
to A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschalger, 2010) as well as by linking it to twin girls in the school
who have two fathers. Overall, each participant exhibited an understanding and acceptance of all
types of families regardless of sexuality.
The second similarity observed included Page’s and Jerry’s initial notions of remaining
unwed and living single. Page and Jerry both pondered as to why people would choose not to
marry. After reading, Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986), in which the princess diverts all
possible suitors in an attempt to remain single, Page believes that the author’s purpose was to
demonstrate how ill-mannered the princess was and by consequence must live a solitary life.
Though critical discussions and reading other similar books, Page began to reflect on how some
people prefer not to marry.
Like Page, Jerry initially wrestled with this notion, during the reading of King & King &
Family (de Haan & Nijland, 2004), Jerry claims that all kings should marry. This perspective

176

reappears while reading Princess Smartypants (Cole, 1986) in that Jerry overlooks the primary
motivation of Princess Smartypants to remain unwed and instead places his focus toward the
heroic tasks made by the suitors. Critical discussions based on the desire to remain single
allowed Jerry to recreate another possible outcome when a similar book is read, The Paper Bag
Princess (Munsch, 1995). In this book, the princess decides not to marry the prince due to his
ungratefulness and rude demeanor which causes Jerry to consider that perhaps the Prince is being
strategic in an endeavor to remain single as well. Originally, both Page and Jerry resisted the
notion that some people would prefer to remain single; however, critical discussions that
accompanied readings of diverse texts permitted both participants to consider other options.
The third similarity documented included Jerry’s and Hank’s initial resistance toward
representations of princesses, particularly boy princesses or boys dressed in feminine clothing.
Jerry’s first rejection to such a representation occurred when reading Olivia and the Fairy
Princess (Falconer, 2012). Jerry examined the cover which included Olivia in princess attire and
rejected the book verbally before realizing that Olivia equally rejects such representations. Jerry
continued to resist this representation when reading My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010) which
was most notable with his critical literacy drawing of the Princess Boy with laceration wounds.
Critical discussions took place with similar representations presented which over time produced
less resistance on the part of Jerry.
By the end of the study and after reading 10,000 Dresses (Ewert, 2008), Jerry illustrated
the main character, Bailey, who identifies as a girl but born as a boy, in a crystal dress for his
critical literacy drawing. Hank, like Jerry, pushed back on representations of princesses, in
particular of boy princesses. After reading My Princess Boy, Hank comments how he will draw
the Princess Boy without the princess belongings, and instead draws the Princess Boy wearing

177

several different Halloween costumes: Easter bunny, spider, ant, and butterfly. By doing so,
Hank recreates the Princess Boy wearing genderless animal creations, which could also be
considered as Hank viewing the princess attire as a costume and not the Princess Boy’s every
day clothes. Yet, Hank tended to identify more with animals representations and it is likely that
Hank sought to portray the Princess Boy in ways similar to Hank’s identity. Through critical
discussions and continued exposure to diverse representations, Hank connects the final book,
10,000 Dresses, which portrays another effeminate boy as the main character, to the book, My
Princess Boy. Similar to Jerry, Hank does not reject the main character in the final book by
illustrating the main character of 10,000 Dresses wearing a crystal dress, as depicted in the actual
text. Although both boys resisted representations of princesses and, in particular, boys as
princesses, critical discussions along with readings of other books portraying effeminate boys
allowed Jerry and Hank to consider various viewpoints and transform their initial responses.
The fourth similarity observed included Page and Hank using critical literacy as a means
of exercising power and agency to interject individual topics which were meaningful to their
identities. For instance, Page inserted her racial heritage into three of her critical literacy
drawings as well as her post-assessment drawing. Page modified skin color and inserted AfricanAmerican hair traits into her produced pieces. Hank constructed characters into his own liking by
altering the sex of girl characters into boys. Hank made such adjustments twice in the study
when the main character was a girl and when no animal characters were equally present. Page
and Hank thus used critical literacy in this study as a means to speak back to the erasures and
silences apparent in the LGBTQ-themed books we read. More importantly, Page and Hank used
critical literacy to insert their own voice and construct their identity in ways that were significant
for them.

178

Another way in which Hank constructed the character or themes was by incorporating
animal associations into his drawings or comments. Hank inserts animal representations into
three of his critical literacy drawings thereby placing the focus on the animals presented in the
story as secondary characters versus the main characters as well as the main theme of the book.
Although these insertions are not in line with sexuality or gender, this type of action illustrates
that both Page and Hank understood the aspects of applying the tenets of critical literacy by
being able to examine the representations and recreate them in ways to include personal and
significant elements to each of them.
Significance of Similarities. The similarities documented in the cross-case analysis are
significant for several reasons. First, none of the participants resisted the representations of a
homosexual family structure. This finding leads us to pose other questions. For instance, if
young children do not exhibit any type of resistance toward various family structures, why are
schools so resistant to integrate these representations? More importantly, by not doing so, are
schools subconsciously promoting discrimination by denying representations to all students?
Studies have shown that LGBTQ topics are harder to discuss as children mature due to the
overexposure of misinformed stereotypes surrounding sexuality and gender. This finding, similar
to the finding of Souto-Manning and Hermann-Wilmarth (2008), underlines how schools can be
complicit in the discrimination acts toward LGBTQ individuals and their families by denying
equal representation.
Second, two of the participants supported the societal view that all individuals should
marry. This finding is significant in that it demonstrates that children in the classroom raised by
single parents or divorced parents are also being denied representation. If children believe that all
adults should marry, what does this mean for the child raised by an autonomous and happy single

179

parent? Likewise, what does this mean for the child raised by a single parent who once viewed
the parent as complete before entering school, but now views the parent as needing a mate?
Third, both of the boy participants initially resisted the representation of children, born as males,
but identify as girls or prefer to express themselves in unconventional ways. What does this
mean for the child in the classroom who exhibits diverse gender expression and who is equally
denied representation? Collectively these three findings documented in the cross-case analysis
are significant because they reveal that schools may not be doing enough to validate the
existence of all its students. Case in point, in a 2013 survey conducted by GLSEN, less than two
out of ten students reported being provided with positive representations about LGBTQ people in
the classroom. Unfortunately, this study brings to light that little advancement has been made
despite the GLSEN findings.
The last finding in the cross-case analysis is essential in that it supports other critical
literacy scholars (Comber, 2005; Hagood, 2002; Janks, 1993; Vasquez, 2010) who believe that
the ultimate goal of critical literacy is to promote transformation. Although all of the participants
demonstrated critical literacy in action toward sexuality and gender, two of the participants
interjected additional missing voices outside of the realm of sexuality and gender. Page inserted
her ethnic heritage onto the representations provided so that her identity would be represented in
the class. Hank inserted animal creatures as mean to insert voices which he viewed as invisible
but important to his perspective of the world. The highest goal of critical literacy is to prompt
students to examine texts for missing voices and in turn observe how students give light to these
missing representations by incorporating them into the classroom. This finding supports that
young children, as early as Kindergarten and first grade, are capable of enacting critical literacy
to the fullest.

180

Differences
The first notable difference occurred in relation to the notion of family. Although each
participant viewed family as neither heterosexually nor homosexually limiting, each participant
did demonstrate particularities about their family preferences. For instance, Page appeared to be
less receptive to families with two fathers. Page offered verbal support in the data, but her critical
literacy drawings portrayed another perspective. After reading King & King & Family (de Haan
& Nijland, 2004) as well as A Tale of Two Daddies (Oelschalger, 2010), Page’s critical literacy
drawings did not include the main characters or were not aligned to the main theme of the book.
Similarly Page suggests that she might have a second mother in China when reading Donovan’s
Big Day (Newman, 2011) a book with two mothers, but does not offer this type of suggestion
when reading books with two fathers. This type of response when considering gender roles is
typical in that a family with two mothers would continue to provide Page with examples of not
only what it means to be a parent, and a mother, but also what it means to be a female according
in society.
Like Page, Jerry also supported books with two fathers in the data, but failed to depict
them in his critical literacy drawings. Unlike Page, however, data taken from the transcripts
illustrate Jerry making personal connections to the books with two fathers and not to the books
with two mothers. When reading A Tale of Two Daddies, Jerry compares the actions of the two
fathers in the story to those of his dad. Lastly, Hank tended to prefer families with boys as
children than girls. For instance, after reading A Tale of Two Daddies, Hank recreates the family
in this critical literacy drawing by illustrating the two fathers and replaces their daughter with a
son. Hank repeats this pattern with the book The White Swan Express: A Story about Adoption
(Okimoto & Aoki, 2002) by substituting the newly adopted girls in the story to older boys in this

181

critical literacy drawing. Each participant was receptive to diverse family structures, but each
displayed their personal preferences in relation to their ideal family. Similar to Page’s response,
it is not surprising that both Jerry and Hank prefer male representations, either in the form of a
father or a brother, as these representations not only align to how Jerry and Hank view their own
identifies but also offer examples of what it means to be a male in society.
The second difference included Hank’s and Jerry’s perspective about gender specific
colors. Hank appeared to support multiple representations of both boys and girls wearing
numerous colors across the gender spectrum. For instance, while reading The Boy with Pink Hair
(Hilton, 2011) which represents the main character, a boy, with pink hair, Hank declared that the
boy has pink hair because he likes the color and because there are no gender specific colors.
Hank proclaimed several times throughout the study: “There are no boy colors or color girls.”
Throughout the study, Jerry not only resisted the representations of princesses but also
the color pink. Jerry later explained his stance while reading My Princess Boy (Kilodavis, 2010)
by stating that people will ridicule boys who associate with objects mostly liked by girls. Jerry
continues to guard his mindset for his critical literacy drawing of this book by omitting the color
pink and drawing the Princess Boy with laceration wounds. Through critical discussions and
additional books related to the topic of colors and gender, Jerry’s viewpoint widens as he
illustrates the main character, a boy, in all pink in his critical literacy drawing after reading The
Boy with Pink Hair.
Significance of Differences. The differences documented in the cross-case analysis are
significant for several reasons. First, the differences provide teachers with information about the
various areas on which students may not agree when enacting critical literacy with a focus on
sexuality and gender. Participants in this study, exhibited openness toward alternative families,

182

but tended to identify with family structures which offered a role model with the same gender as
their own. With that mind, it is not surprising that Page would prefer to have a family with two
mothers versus two fathers. A family with two fathers would deny Page from having a feminine
role model as well as efface her own gender from the parental role relationship. Like Page, Jerry
and Hank prefer families which offer gender role models. For Hank, the masculine role model is
desired in the form of a brother, while Jerry prefers the masculine role to be offered in the form
of two fathers. While Jerry and Hank manifested different masculine role models, both, like
Page, did not want their own gender effaced within the family structure. Teachers should pay
particular attention to gender preferences as means to recognize them and invite students to
explore their gender preferences further.
The second difference which occurred among the participants was the diverse degrees of
acceptance toward genderless colors, particularly among the boys. This finding reveals another
variation of responses in which teachers can expect to see across their students. As noted
previously, (Blaise, 2009) gender continues to be a harder construct for young children to view
as fluid versus sexuality. The notion that colors could be genderless according to Jerry, for
example, demonstrates his inability to view gender in a fluid manner.
In sum, the differences noted in the cross-case analysis not only provide a glimpse of
what teachers might face when enacting critical literacy in the classroom with a focus on
sexuality and gender, but also provide teachers with insights for additional lessons. Teachers
should begin to explore these differences by encouraging students to discuss these perspectives
and to examine the multiplicity of views. Finally, student differences rooted in sexuality and
gender should lead to other critical lessons which challenge students to analyze the root of
subject formation as well as examine how all minority groups are textually portrayed overall.

183

Summary
This chapter presented and discussed findings by examining the young participants’
responses according to Hagood’s (2002) perspective of how to best apply critical literacy in the
classroom. Following Hagood’s (2002) advice both identity formation and subjectivity were
analyzed on whether the participant tended to focus on the production of identity by aligning to
the characters presented in the chosen text, or tended to examine the construction of subjectivity
and act through resistance. Critical literacy enacted with a focus solely on identity formation or
construction of subjectivity can be problematic (Hagood, 2002). In the case of Page, a production
of identity response would have only suggested that Page tended to reproduce and empathize
with effeminate boys as well as the representation of princesses when reading LGBTQ-themed
books. Allowing an examination of construction of subjectivity to occur, however, demonstrated
that Page equally asserted subjectivity by pushing back from the notion of remaining single as
well as, and most importantly, inserting a representation in keeping with her ethnicity by altering
the skin color or hair texture of several characters in the books we read. By following Hagood’s
advice, critical literacy allowed Page to enjoy the LGBTQ-themed texts while evaluating the
social construction of them as well as question which representations were present and which
ones were not.
Additional analysis occurred through conducting a cross-case analysis. Such analysis
found that participants produced four similar responses and two different responses when
collectively examining the cases. The similarities among some of the participants included the
following topics: (1) family is not heterosexually or homosexually limiting, (2) questioning the
concept of not wanting to marry, (3) resisting representations of princesses, particularly boy
princesses and (4) using critical literacy to insert individual and meaningful topics. The

184

differences among some of the participants were: (1) the individual and unique views about
family structures and (2) the participants’ views according to color preferences and gender.
Collective responses across the participants help to provide classroom teachers and researchers
with more detailed descriptions about which topics may surface in the classroom when critically
reading texts which focus on sexuality and gender. When all children are encouraged to evaluate
texts for the representations present along with those that are missing, only then can children
begin to reflect on the connection between language and power (Janks, 2010, 1993). Critical
literacy, with a focus on production of identity and construction of subjectivity, plays an
important role in either reproducing or challenging the unequal structures of power in society,
and in particular, supports equity and social justice practices at the elementary level.
The following chapter offers a summative discussion of the findings, addresses
implications of the findings for the field of LGBTQ scholarship and in the classroom, notes the
limitations of the study, and makes recommendations for further research.

185

Chapter 6
Conclusion
Despite the fact that we continue to live in a society which recognizes that discrimination
in general is wrong, we continue to silence LGBTQ members and their families by not
recognizing their existence in schools (Mayo, 2006). One of the most troubling perspectives
about silencing the members of the LGBTQ community and those who love them is the
continued inattention to the safety and well-being of these individuals and their families. Such is
apparent when examining the statistical findings by GLSEN (Gay, Lesbian, Straight, Education
Network), as noted below of the schools in Ohio. In fact, Mayo (2006) underscores Sedgwick’s
(1990) perspective that “no other minority is so faced with medical and educational institutions
intent on their eradication prior to their adulthood” (p. 473). The silencing or “eradication”, as
Mayo asserts, persists in schools today through examining the GLSEN 2013 National School
Climate Survey. These statistics pertain exclusively to schools in Ohio.


Only 4% of LGBTQ members attended a school with a comprehensive anti-bullying
harassment policy that included specific protections based on sexual orientation and
gender expression.



More than 9 in 10 students heard “gay” used in a negative way and nearly 9 in 10 heard
other homophobic remarks at school regularly.



Less than 2 in 10 students were taught positive representations of LGBTQ people, history
and events.



Only 13% of students reported having had any type of access to LGBTQ-related
resources and supports in Ohio Schools

186

Students learn powerful lessons about sexuality and gender by the ways in which schools
and teachers validate or silence LGBTQ individuals (Blackburn, 2012; Blount, 2000; Birden,
2005). As a parent, teacher, and LGBTQ member in Ohio, I believe that schools can play an
instrumental role in every child’s life. Schools can either interrupt heteronormativity by
encouraging students to use critical literacy to explore the status quos of the world or schools can
choose to remain silent and thus be equal participants in the discriminating process against
LGBTQ members and their families.
One of the most poignant cases within the last 25 years included the banning of three
pages which contained LGBTQ representations in the Children of the Rainbow curriculum guide
(Lipkin, 1993). In comparison, to the 2013 survey conducted by GLSEN which reported that less
than two students out of ten were provided with positive representations about LGBTQ people in
the classroom or that 13% of students reported having access to LGBTQ resources, schools
continue to fall short of validating LGBTQ people and their families. Curricula which only offer
heteronormative perspectives can deny children the chance to see family and friends who exhibit
gender creativity, defy gender norms, or identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual in a positive
manner.
In view of the fact that my daughter at the age of two, along with her classmates, began to
question the social expectations regarding sexuality and gender and, more importantly, are
expected to participate in a compulsory school system, this study was inspired by her and others
like her. For reasons both political and personal, this study sought to examine how young
children respond, verbally and non-verbally, to critical readings of LGBTQ-themed children’s
literature. Such an examination could provide snapshots of how young children react and explore
their ways of thinking about sexuality and gender when exposed to LGBTQ-themed literature.

187

The findings provided a glimpse of how such conversations might appear in other classrooms,
both in terms of pedagogical and personal reflections, by including the perspectives of the
teacher and the young students and by providing actual conversations in the data set.
Additionally, the cross-analysis illustrated what themes may arise in the classroom particularly
when more than one participant demonstrated a similar or different response. Globally, this
study aims to encourage curriculum change that supports equity and social practices regarding
the LGBTQ community and their families at the elementary level. Teachers interested in
promoting equity around this topic should reconceptualize storytime to include a critical literacy
approach. Critical literacy needs to validate and welcome both production of identity and
construction of subjectivity responses so that participants, as readers and more importantly, as
individuals, feel at ease to construct their own self in accordance, in contrast, or differently to the
presented representations in the classroom books. LGBTQ-themed books serve as an excellent
medium to ensure that students with LGBTQ family members or LGBTQ individuals in the
classroom feel validated as well as allow other students to consider and reflect upon diverse
sexual and gender expression.
In order to guide such conversations, critical literacy was used to analyze how students
responded to diverse texts with LGBTQ representations. Bringing insights from my previous
study of examining preschoolers reading LGBTQ-themed literature (Bridgman 2012), I
acknowledged the significance of using a critical perspective which challenges existing power
structures and works to expand ideologies when working with young children (Cushman,
Kintgen, Kroll & Rose, 2001). That said, I embraced this study with a critical perspective
yearning to understand how critical literacy can work best in the classroom with young children
and when reading LGBTQ-themed children literature.

188

In order to do so, I turned to the work of Vasquez (2004) who in her book, Negotiating
Critical Literacies with Young Children, asserts that young children are capable of using critical
literacy to examine the assumptions about society as well as question their own perspectives
about the text. Since critical literacy requires that the teacher guide students in their analysis of
texts, and in this study, LGBTQ-themed texts, the study was equally grounded in critical literacy
and queer theory.
Consistent with Freire’s (1970/2000) notion of liberatory education, critical literacy
encourages students to make inquiries about society’s taken-for-granted values, ideals, norms,
and so forth (Sargis, 2008). A critical literacy lens thus facilitated a closer examination of the
social valorization of heterosexuality over homosexuality within the school context (Birden,
2005; DePalma & Atkinson, 2009). Equally applying the tenets of critical literacy renders the
reader as an active questioner who seeks to understand the connection between “reading the
word” and “reading the world” (Freire & Macedo, 1987). This study provided an occasion to
consider how critical literacy learning not only focuses on students recognizing the tensions
between the word and the world, but also empowers students to transform reality by envisioning
their own renditions aligned to their beliefs and in their own words.
Likewise, a queer theory lens was used to alter perceptions related to gender and
sexuality through talking about commonly-held binaries and promoting the importance of
commenting on representations of sexuality and gender in children’s books. These theories
intertwined permitted me to focus on disrupting the everyday heteronormative practices, by
analyzing the literature, as means to investigate the social and equity issues surrounding
sexuality and gender (Comber, 2005).

189

This study was significant not only in that it contributes to the scholarship focused on
examining topics related to sexuality and gender in schools, but also adds to the body of
literature emphasizing critical literacy and equity issues. Similarly, for teachers to consider
including LGBTQ representations in the curriculum or the use of LGBTQ texts with elementary
children—and to feel successful doing so— more scholarship is needed to capture real life
experiences of what happens when a teacher and students discuss sexuality and gender.
Additionally, teachers will benefit from having more knowledge about LGBTQ texts as well as
tool box of strategies for integrating these texts into the classroom. By examining these
processes, I sought to better understand how the role of education can reproduce or challenge
unequal power structures in society, as well as to reflect on the overall process as a parent,
teacher, and LGBTQ member.
Findings pointed to a number of considerations about both the student participants and
my role as a teacher. With these findings, I hope to provide both teachers and teacher educators
with evidence-based ways of knowing and understanding how to render schools a more socially
just place for all students, including those who know or identify as LGBTQ. This final chapter
summarizes the findings, outlines implications of the study, addresses the study’s limitations,
and makes recommendations for future research.
Summary of the Findings
This collective case study examined two research questions pertaining to the
implementation of critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender using LGBTQ-themed
children’s books with young children. The first research question focused on analyzing how
young children responded to LGBTQ representations within children’s texts and to the topic of
sexuality and gender in general via critical literacy. Analysis of individual data sources included

190

examining transcripts, critical literacy drawings, photographs and pre- and post-assessment
pictures. Findings revealed that participants produced three general responses to the
representations and to the topic of sexuality and gender while reading LGBTQ-themed children’s
books. The first response, student rejects, happened when a participant refused to make any
connections to the main character or author’s purpose to the book. Since the overarching goal of
critical literacy includes action or transformative thinking on the part of the reader, examination
of student recreates or student rejects responses were further evaluated to determine if
participant responses changed over the course of the study, and in particular to the topic of
sexuality or gender. The second response, student replicates, occurred when the participant
duplicated the main character or the author’s purpose of the book. The third response, student
recreates, took place when the participant altered the main character or the author’s purpose of
the book.
Critical literacy in action occurred for each participant. For instance, Jerry and Page
initially questioned why some individuals would choose to be single while Jerry and Hank
originally resisted representations of princesses, particularly boys wearing dresses or tiaras. All
participants’ resistance in these areas decreased through continued exposure to LGBTQ-themed
books and critical literacy discussions.
After identifying the three types of possible student responses, this study also included a
robust discussion about analyzing these findings through a critical literacy and queer theory lens
(see Chapter 5). By doing so, consideration of whether these young readers produced critical
literacy responses in keeping with production of identity or construction of subjectivity took
place. Production of identity responses appeared to align mostly with participant responses of
Student Replicates. Participants who replicated the given representations tended to support the

191

identities supplied in the text and constructed by the author. Construction of subjectivity
appeared to align mostly with participant responses of Student Recreates and Student Rejects.
Participants who rejected or recreated the supplied representations in the text exercised power
and negotiated their understanding in ways that supported their construction of being and in
certain cases led to transformative thinking. An example of how participants equally benefited
from the principles of queer theory was also included in the discussion. Participant responses that
demonstrated varying perspectives to the same text revealed fluidity. By doing so, the participant
resisted being located to a particular side of the binary in relation to sexuality or gender:
homosexuality versus heterosexuality; boys’ colors versus girls’ colors and so forth.
The second research question examined how the researcher assuming the role as teacher
enacted critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender. The first finding, focusing on
power, revealed that the teacher incorporated diverse representations and called the participants
attention to such diverse representations. The second finding, teaching critical language,
demonstrated that the teacher modeled critical language through posing questions and
encouraging participants to make personal connections.
Findings from the cross-case analysis (see chapter 5) demonstrated that the participants
produced four similar responses and two different responses. Similarities ranged from (1)
participants not viewing families as heterosexually or homosexuality limiting, (2) questioning the
desire to remain unmarried, (3) resisting representations of boys wearing dresses or tiaras and (4)
using critical literacy to insert individual topics that were meaningful to their identity. The two
differences included how participants (1) responded differently to the various family structures
and (2) to the notion of genderless colors. The cross-case analysis findings cause us to consider
why the curriculum does not include LGBTQ representations in the classroom given that

192

students who identify with diverse expressions of sexuality and gender are being denied
representation, and more significantly, how students, as demonstrated in this study, produced a
greater sense of awareness and understanding toward LGBTQ individuals by replicating or
recreating such representations. Through analyzing various LGBTQ representations and
critically discussing the expectations governing sexuality and gender, students, similar to those in
this study, illustrated that exposure to LGBTQ topics does not promote a loss of childhood
innocence, but in fact allows students to construct the world in ways that make sense to them.
Curriculum that excludes these types of representations silence the LGBTQ students in the
classroom as well as the student raised by an LGBTQ parent or has a LGBTQ sibling or
identifies with diverse forms of gender expression.
All children should be taught how to analyze texts for the representations present as well
as those that are missing only then can children begin to reflect on the connection between
language and power (Janks, 1993). An objective of this study was to provide snapshot of how
schools, including teachers and students, can assist each other in exploring subjectivity by
questioning the normative practices and ideologies portrayed in texts through literacy
conversations. Globally, this study aims to encourage a curriculum change that supports equity
and social justice practices regarding the LGBTQ community and their families at the
elementary levels. The next section provides possible implications for the classroom as well as
future research.
Implications
Several potential implications are possible for both classroom practice and for future
research. In order to understand how critical literacy with a focus on sexuality and gender using
LGBTQ-themed books could be specifically approached in the classroom, this study analyzed

193

the responses of three elementary students and one teacher. Data identified three possible student
responses. This study also demonstrated how a critical literacy approach could be used in ways
that position the teacher as a social agent inviting students to examine the heteronormative
practices through literacy instruction. The findings provide various implications both
pedagogically and to field of research.
Pedagogical
One of the most important implications of this study is the argument that heteronormative
narratives could be counterbalanced with diverse representations of gender and sexuality by
inviting such topics into the classroom and fostering multiple views by means of critical literacy.
Exposing participants to diverse representations, as well inviting them to consider the underlying
messages of the dominant and prolific representations found in the majority of children’s books,
was essential to expanding their knowledge of sexuality and gender in general. Reading LGBTQthemed children’s literature served as an excellent medium for inviting participants to analyze
the various representations included in texts to those which are mainly absent.
Similarly, this study revealed how participants used critical literacy to investigate social
and equity issues in the classroom that were not only outside the realm of sexuality and gender,
but were also specific and important to their individual identity. This kind of critical literacy took
place when Hank and Page inserted certain characteristics into their critical literacy drawings
which were meaningful to them. For instance, although many of the LGBTQ-themed books
offered limited African-American representations, Page used the tenets of critical literacy in
order to display her ethnic heritage in her drawings or offered comments about AfricanAmerican traits. By constructing a space and modeling critical literacy in the classroom,
participants, such as Page, became skilled in contrasting herself into being.

194

Additionally, this study provided purposeful and practical ways for teachers to frame and
model the topic of sexuality and gender via critical literacy with young children. Two key
findings concerning the teacher’s role entailed (1) the need to incorporate LGBTQ-themed books
in positive ways and (2) to model the ways to use critical language in the classroom. By inviting
students to examine and engage in conversations about diverse representations provide students
with the foundation to use critical literacy for topics which were individually meaningful for
them. This study not only provides teachers with pedagogical suggestions outlined in the two
findings above but also offers additional insights based on the teacher’s journal. Elementary
educators interested in using critical literacy with young children might find this study valuable
in that it offers both pedagogical and personal viewpoints as a teacher. For instance,
pedagogically this study illustrates that in order to successfully enact critical literacy in the
classroom teachers must recognize both production of identity and construction of subjectivity
responses. By doing so, students will feel at ease to construct their own identity within the
classroom. Teachers should also look for ways in which their students recreate representations in
order to bring voice to identities which matter to the students and which may not be present in
the classroom literature. Teachers should also expect to face challenges at the onset of teaching
students to enact the tenets of critical literacy. Asking students to analyze the author’s purpose of
a text is quite different from expecting students to share their personal viewpoints about the book
or expecting them to identify the cause and effect. For this reason, teachers should expect
students to struggle with this new literacy approach, which equally highlights the importance of
teachers modeling critical literacy language more at the beginning of the critical reading
sessions. With time, as demonstrated in this study, students will employ critical language skills

195

and begin to analyze the text by looking for the author’s purpose without any additional
scaffolding.
Another significant implication of this study was its ability to encourage teachers to
reconceptualize storytime by expanding the parameters of such a staple classroom activity to
include a critical literacy approach. This study demonstrated that adopting a critical literacy
approach was not only possible with elementary students, but also that it entailed reading beyond
the word and pictures of all texts and to read with the intention of interpreting the text in relation
to the text’s purpose, message, and place within society. Critical literacy invited readers to
examine issues regarding power, especially in relation to silencing or limiting voices and
particularly within the realm of sexuality and gender. Finally, this study showed the importance
of reflecting how the production of identity and the construction of subjectivity are essential
when using critical literacy in the classroom and that readers should be able to react to texts and
construct themselves in ways that are fitting to them.
Research
This section discusses the implications regarding research; suggestions for future research
are made in the recommendations section. The most significant implication of this study is its
addition to the limited body of research examining LGBTQ topics. Although current researchers
assert the importance of integrating LGBTQ topics into the classroom, few studies have
documented a systematic research process that is supported by an explicit research question or
methodology (Ryan et al., 2013; Vasquez, 2004; Davies, 2003; Schall & Kauffmann, 2003;
Dutro 2001). With such limited scholarship, resources are scarce for educators and fellow
researchers particularly interested in integrating LGBTQ topics at the elementary level. In the
documentary, It’s Elementary, Chasnoff and Cohen (1996) illustrate that elementary students

196

possess a sense of fairness and kind of institutional philosophy about all sexualities (Hulsebosch
et al., 1999). Data generated in this study also suggested that elementary students are capable of
critically examining LGBTQ-themed children’s literature. Findings from this study help to
validate Vasquez’s (2010) work of using critical literacy with young children as well as support
LGBTQ scholars’ claims that sexuality and gender topics should be part of the elementary
curriculum (Chasnoff and Cohen, 1996).
In comparison to other LGBTQ studies, one methodical difference of this study was to
provide a dual glimpse of both the young participants and the researcher serving as a teacher
reading the LGBTQ-themed books aloud. The limited research in the field offers a perspective of
either the student(s) or the teacher, but not both (Bower and Klecka, 2009; Vicars, 2009;
Whelan, 2006; Schneider, 2001). Next, this study examined each data source accordingly and
then offered a cross-case analysis on the young participants as a way to enhance the credibility of
the study. This study provides researchers with various perspectives based on the different data
sources—transcripts, critical literacy drawings, photographs and pre- and post-assessments—as
well as how each data point supported the three identified student responses. It also provides
critical literacy researchers with a perspective on the importance of inviting both construction of
subjectivity and production of identity responses in the classroom.
Studies of this sort are not only important to add to the limited research in the field and to
inform the elementary educators, but also are timely given the increasing attention about sexual
and gender equality nationwide. From the debate over the Supreme Court’s decision to legalize
gay marriage to the latest report from GLSEN: Bias, Bullying, and Homophobia in Grades K-6
(2012), it is clear that the nation needs to recognize and challenge the inequalities faced by
LGBTQ individuals and their families. By welcoming LGBTQ topics in the early grades,

197

educational researchers and literacy experts assert that schools use a more proactive stance
against homophobia by portraying accurate and positive representations of society that include
LGBTQ individual and their families (Blaise, 2009; Chasnoff & Cohen, 1996; DePalma &
Atkinson, 2009; Hermann-Wilmarth, 2010, 2007).
In sum, this study includes several lessons for both the teacher as well as the researcher.
First, in accordance with other research, this study has taught us that critical literacy is possible
with young children. Second, this study has taught us that critical literacy topics can include even
complex topics such as sexuality and gender. Third, this study has taught us that when enacting
critical literacy with young children, it is imperative that both production of identity and
construction of subjectivity perspectives be included in the process. Fourth, this study has taught
us that critical literacy can produce equity in the classroom by validating both production of
identity and construction of subjectivity student responses, by doing so, students learn to
critically analyze texts for representations which speak to their identity, and when such
representations are not present, students, as demonstrated in this study with Page and Hank, will
begin to incorporate these representations in the space.
Limitations
There are a few limitations to consider which could have improved the study in the
following areas. First, the study only analyzed three participants in depth; a larger participant
pool would have provided a broader and realistic snapshot of a classroom setting. Second, the
study was conducted in a non-profit daycare facility which offers after-school programs to a
small number of students which may limit applicability elsewhere, such as to a large public
school district. Third, student absences and the photo developing interfered with collecting data
on particular days. Additional time in the field and other data sources were used to counteract

198

such offsets in the data collection process. Fourth, other minimal challenges included the
participants’ inabilities to fully articulate their thoughts or interject unrelated comments into the
discussion. To overcome these challenges, I redirected the attention of the participant(s) or
sought clarification from the participant directly. Finally, another limitation of the conducting a
qualitative case study was that each participant was bounded to a particular classroom setting
which lessens the likelihood of being able to make claims that may apply to a larger or different
educational setting.
A final limitation worth noting is the potential for researcher bias, as a member of the
LGBTQ community whose research interests’ stems from personal struggles encountered in my
educational and heteronormative experiences raised in the south. Next, as a same-sex parent and
teacher in a public school system, I have faced many heteronormative situations and assumptions
made in schools. For this reason, I elected to complete the readings LGBTQ-themed children’s
books during this study. Overall, I recognize the initial biases that I brought to this study and for
this reason kept a journal as a way to remain cognizant of addressing the diverse realms of
sexuality and gender by not highlighting one lifestyle over another.
Recommendations for Future Research
The following recommendations are made in light of future research and in consideration
of the limitations of this study. First, future studies might explore a larger number of students
using critical literacy within a school classroom versus observing a handful of students in an
after school program. In doing so, data would allow for greater impact across various different
educational settings. Second, future studies which observe elementary students beyond the
second grade would increase participants’ abilities to fully articulate thoughts and thus increasing
the likelihood to capture data with additional levels of complexity. Participants’ penmanship

199

both in regards to writing down personal thoughts as well as drawing would be more pronounced
beyond the first grade. Older participants might also produce a greater level of sophisticated
responses due to obtaining a higher level of background knowledge and personal experiences
both in and outside of the classroom.
Future studies could also include examining an actual teacher who conducts critical
literacy reading with students thereby eliminating the dual role—researcher and teacher— taken
on in this study. Other studies may decide to analyze various teachers conducting critical literacy
readings across one grade level in order to compare and contrast the perspectives of multiple
teachers. Studies of this kind might increase the likelihood of elementary educators
implementing critical literacy using LGBTQ-themed books after reading how other educators did
so in their classrooms.
In closing, these types of studies are needed in order to provide a deeper understanding of
how to best use literacy in the classroom to improve the students’ educational experience overall
by focusing on social and equity issues in society. Such inquiries could offer additional
rationales as to why the topic of sexuality and gender should be included at the elementary level.
Also, additional research would expand the existing scholarship and possibly provide ways of
combating the heteronormative practices at the elementary level. Research of this kind would not
only accommodate a diverse population of learners, but also validate the lives of LGBTQ
students and children, such as my own, from LGBTQ households. This type of research raises
other important questions such as whether the need to explore LGBTQ issues in education at the
secondary level would be as critical if more focused was placed on the primary or elementary
levels. Finally, by addressing LGBTQ issues in the younger grades, other questions emerge on a
larger scale, such as: Could we eliminate or lessen the pressures and threat of suicide related to

200

the coming-out process mostly associated with the upper grades as well as galvanize a greater
body of LGBTQ-themed children’s literature geared for younger children and their families?
In sum, this chapter offered concluding comments about the investigation of three young
participants and the researcher serving as teacher regarding the implementation of critical
literacy into the classroom with a focus on sexuality and gender using LGBTQ-themed
children’s books. A summary of the findings in relation to the research questions was included
along with how the data was viewed from a theoretical perspective. Implications to both the field
and to the classroom were discussed to address the contributions of this study overall, and
limitations were noted as a means and hope to generate suggestions for future research which
may shed light and give credence to the LGBTQ individuals of society as well as to the children
raised or living with other LGBTQ family members.
One final and most important implication of this study is a personal hope that not only
my daughter, but also others like her, will have the reassurance and the right to complete their
academic years in a school which textually and positively represents all families including
individuals of the LGBTQ society.

201

References
Althusser, L. (2001). Ideology and ideological state apparatuses on the reproduction of the
conditions of production. In Leitch, V.B. (Ed.), The Norton Anthology of Theory and
Criticism, 1483-1508. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Alvermann, D. E. & Hagood, M. C. (2000). Fandom and critical media literacy. Journal of
Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 43(5), 436-446.
Anderson, G. L., Herr, K., & Nihlen, A.S. (1994). Studying your own school: An educator’s
guide to qualitative practitioner research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, Inc.
Angrosino, M.V., & Mays de Perez, K. (2003). Rethinking observation from method to context.
In N.K. Denzin & Y.S. Lincoln (Ed.). Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials
(pp.107-154). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Banks, W.P. (2009). Literacy, sexuality, and the value(s) of queer young adult literature. English
Journal, 33-36.
Barone, D. M. (2011). Case Study Research. In N. K. Duke & M. H. Mallette (Ed.). Literacy
Research Methodologies (pp.7-27). New York: The Guilford Press.
Barone, T. (2000). Introduction. In W. Pinar (Ed.), Aesthetics, politics, and educational inquiry:
Essays and examples (Counterpoints Vol.117) New York: Peter Lang.
Barton, D., & Hamilton, M. (2000). Situated literacies: Reading and writing in context. London:
Routledge.
Besner, H.F., & Spungin, C. I. (1995). Gay and lesbian students: Understanding their needs.
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.
Birden, S. (2005). Rethinking sexual identity in education. Lanham, MA: Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, Inc.

202

Blackburn, M. V. (2012). Interrupting hate: Homophobia in schools and what literacy can do
about it. New York: Teachers College Press.
Blackburn, M. V., & Buckley, J.F. (2005). Teaching queer-inclusive English language arts.
Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 49(3), 202-212.
Blackburn, M.V. & Clark, C. T. (2011). Analyzing talk in a long-term literature discussion
group: ways of operating within LGBT-inclusive and queer discourses. Reading
Research Quarterly, 46, 222-248.
Blackburn, M.V., & Clark, C. T. (2011). Becoming readers of literature with LGBTQ themes: In
and out of classrooms. In Wolfe, S.A. Coats, K., Enciso, P., & Jenkins, C.A. (Eds.),
Handbook of research on children’s and young adult literature (pp. 148-163). New York:
Routledge.
Blackburn, M.V., & Smith, J.M. (2010). Moving beyond the inclusion of LGBT-themed
literature in English language arts classrooms: Interrogating heteronormativity and
exploring intersectionality. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 53(8), 625-634.
Blaise, M. (2010). Kiss and tell: Gendered narratives and childhood sexuality. Australian
Journal of Early Childhood, 35(1), 1-9.
Blaise, M. (2009). “What a girl wants, what a girl needs”: Responding to sex, gender, and
sexuality in the early childhood classroom. Journal of Research in Childhood Education,
23(4), 450-460.
Blaise, M. (2005). Playing it straight: Uncovering gender discourse in the early childhood
classroom. New York: Routledge.
Bloome, D., & Talwalkar, S. (1997). Critical discourse analysis and the study of reading and
writing. Reading Research Quarterly. 32(1), 2-11.

203

Blount, J. M. (2000). Spinsters, bachelors, and other gender transgressors in school employment.
1850-1990. Review of Educational Research, 70(1), 83-101.
Boenke, M. (1999). Transforming families. Imperial Beach, CA: Trook.
Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. (2007). Qualitative Research for Education (5th ed.). Boston:
Pearson Education.
Bogdan, R. C. & Biklen, S.K. (2003). Qualitative research for education (4th ed.). Boston:
Pearson.
Bower, L. & Klecka, C. (2009). (Re)considering normal: Queering social norms for parents and
teachers. Teaching Education, 20(4), 357-373.
Bridgman, B. (2012). Princesses, Pirates, & Heteronormativity. Unpublished manuscript.
Britzman, D. (1995). Is there a queer pedagogy? Or, stop reading straight. Educational Theory,
45(2), 151-165.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Brydon-Miller, M. (2012). Addressing the ethical challenges of community-based research,
Teaching Ethics, 12(2), 157-162.
Burns, T. (2009). Searching for peace: Exploring issues of war with young children. Language
Arts, 86(6), 421-430.
Burt, T., Gelnaw, A., & Lesser, L.K. (2010). Creating welcoming and inclusive environments for
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) families in early childhood settings. YC:
Young Children, 65(1), 97.
Butler, J. (1999) Gender trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (2nd ed.). New York,
NY: Routledge.

204

Calefati, J. (2008). Gay high schools offer a haven from bullies: But the schools in Milwaukee
and New York also reawaken the debate over school segregation: Retrieved from (June,
2014): http://www.usnews.com/education/articles/2008/12/31/gay-high-schools-offer-ahaven-from-bullies
Chantel, J.A., Flint, A.S., Hammel, J. & Pomeroy, K.H. (2007). Young children, social issues,
and critical literacy: Stories of teachers and researchers. Young Children, 62(1), 73Chasnoff, D., & Cohen, H. (1996). It’s elementary: Talking about gay issues in school. San
Francisco: Women’s Educational Media Film.
Clare, M. M., & James, S.E. (2005). Secondary schools, LGBT. Youth, education, and
sexualities: An international encyclopedia, 2.
Clifford, G. (1989). Man/woman/teacher: Gender family and a career in American educational
history. In D. Warren (Ed.), American Teachers: Histories of a profession at work.
(pp.293-343). New York: MacMillan.
Cochran-Smith, M. (1984). The making of a reader. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Cohen, D. H. (1971). The young child: Learning to observe to learn. The significance of the
young child’s motor development, Georgianna Engstrom (ed.). Washington, DC:
NAEYC.
Comber, B. (2013). Schools as meeting places: Critical and inclusive literacies in changing local
environments. Language Arts, 90(5), 361-371.
Comber, B. (2005). Making use of theories about literacy and justice: Teachers re-searching
practice. Educational Action Research, 13(1) 43-55.

205

Comber, B. (2001). Critical Literacy: What is it, and what does it look like in elementary
classrooms? Negotiating critical literacies. National Council of Teachers of English, 6(3),
1-2.
Crisp, T., & Hiller, B. (2011). Telling tales about gender: A critical analysis of Caldecott MedalWinning Picturebooks, 1938-2011. Journal of Children’s Literature, 37(2), 18-29.
Crisp, T. (2009). Into the Closet: Cross-dressing and the gendered body in children’s literature
and film (review). Children’s Literature Association Quarterly, 34(1), 67-70.
Cunningham, J. W., & Fitzgerald, J. (1996). Epistemology and reading. Reading Research
Quarterly, 31 (1) 36-60.
Cushman, E., Kintgen, E. R., Kroll, B.M., & Rose, M. (2001). Literacy: A Critical Sourcebook.
Boston: Bedford/St. Martins.
Daniel, M. F. & Auriac, E. (2011). Philosophy, critical thinking and philosophy for children.
Educational Philosophy and Theory, 43(5), 415-435.
Darder, A. (1991). Culture and power in the classroom: A critical foundation for bicultural
education. Greenwood Publishing Group.
Davies, B. (2003). Frogs and snails and feminist tales: Preschool children and gender. Cresskill:
Hampton Press, Inc.
Davies, B. (1989). Shards of glass: Children reading and writing beyond gender identities.
Cresskill: Hampton Press. Inc.
Davies, B. (1989). The discursive production of the male/female dualism in school settings.
Oxford Review of Education, 15(3), 229-241.
Delpit, L. D. (2006). Other people’s children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. The New Press.

206

DePalma, R., & Atkinson, E. (2009). Interrogating heteronormativity in primary schools: The
work of the no outsiders project. Stoke-on-Trent, UK: Trentham Books.
Dutro, E. (2001). “But that’s a girls’ book!” Exploring gender boundaries in children’s reading
practices, The Reading Teacher, 55(4), 376-384.
Dykstra, L. A. (2005). Trans-friendly preschool. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Issues in Education,
3(1), 7-13.
Edelsky, C. (1991). Reading history. The Review of Education/ Pedagogy/ Cultural Studies,
14(1) 31-40.
Erickson, F. (1982). Audiovisual records as a primary data source. Sociological Methods &
Research, 11(2) 212-232.
Fakhrid-Deen, T (2010). Let’s get this straight: The ultimate handbook for youth with LGBT
parents. Berkeley, CA: Seal Press.
Foucault, M. (1982). The subject and power. Critical inquiry, 8(4), 777-795.
Foucault, M. (1978). The history of sexuality, Vol. 1. New York: Pantheon.
Fox, C. (2007). From Transaction to transformation: (En) Countering white heteronormativity
in “safe spaces”. College English, 69(5), 496-511.
Freeman, N. K. (2007) Preschoolers’ perceptions of gender appropriate toys and their parents’
beliefs about genderized behaviors: Miscommunication, mixed messages, or hidden
truths? Early Childhood Education Journal, 34(5), 357-366.
Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed. (30th anniversary ed.). New York: Continuum.
(Original work published 1970).
Freire, P., & Macedo, D. (1987). Literacy. Reading the word and the world. South Hadley, MA:
Bergin and Garvey.

207

Fuery, P. (1995). The theory of absence: Subjectivity, Signification, and Desire. Greenwood
Press.
Gee, J.P. (2005). The new literacy studies: from “socially situated” to the work. Situated
literacies: Reading and writing in context, 2, 177-194.
Gee. J. P. (2000). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education. Review of Research in
Education, 25, 99-125.
Gee, J. P. (1989). Literacy, discourse and linguistics: Introduction and what is literacy? Journal
of Education, 171(1), 5-25.
Gettys, T. (2014) Catholic school teachers in Ohio leaving their jobs rather than sign anti-LGBT
‘morality clause’. Retrieved from http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2014/catholic-schoolteachers-in-ohio-leaving-their-jobs-rather-than-sign-anti-lgbt-morality-clause/
Gilmore, D. P., & Bell, K. (2006). We are family: Using diverse family structure literature with
children . Reading Horizons, 46(4), 279.
GLBT Online High School Survey (2013). Retrieved from (June 2014):
www.glbtonlinehighschool.com
Gregory, A. E. & Cahill, M. A. (2009). Constructing critical literacy: Self-reflexive ways for
curriculum and pedagogy. Critical Literacy: Theories and Practices, 3(2),6-16.
Hagood, M. C.(2002). Critical literacy for whom? Reading Research and Instruction, 41(3),247265.
Hall, K. W. (2008). Reflecting on our read-aloud practices: The importance of including
culturally authentic literature. Young Children, 63(1), 80-86.
Hancock, D. R., & Algozzine, B. (2006). Doing a case study. Teachers College Columbia
University, New York.

208

Hamel, J. (1993). Case Study Methods, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hanlon, J. (2009). How educators can address homophobia in elementary schools. Encounter:
Education for Meaning and Social Justice, 2(1), 32-45.
Harbeck, K. M. (1997). Gay and lesbian educators: Personal freedoms, Public constraints.
Malden, UK: Amethyst Press and Productions.
Harstock, N. (1990). Foucault on power: A theory for women? Feminism / Postmodernism.
Nicholson, LJ.
Harwood, D. (2008). Deconstructing and reconstructing Cinderella: Theoretical defenses of
critical literacy for young children. Language and Literacy, 10(2).
Hatch, J. A. (2002). Doing Qualitative Research in Educational Settings. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Hermann-Wilmarth, J., & Ryan, C. (2013). Interrupting the single story: LGBT issues in the
language arts classroom. Language Arts, 90(3), 226-231.
Hermann-Wilmarth, J. (2010). More than book talks: Preservice teacher dialogue after reading
gay and lesbian children’s literature. Language Arts, 87(3), 188-198.
Hermann-Wilmarth, J. M. (2007). Full inclusion: Understanding the role of gay and lesbian texts
and films in teacher education classrooms. Language Arts, 84(4), 347-356.
Hocquenghem, G. (1978). Homosexual Desire. London: Allison & Busby.
Hoffman, J. V., Afflerbach, P., Duffy-Hester, A.M., McCarthey, S. J., & Baumann, J.F. (2014).
Balancing Principles for Teaching Elementary Reading. Routledge.
hooks, B. (1994). Outlaw Culture. New York: Rutledge.
Hulsebosch, P., Koerner, M.E., & Ryan, D. P. (1999). Supporting students responding to gay and
lesbian parents. In Letts IV, W.J. & Sears, J. T. (Eds). Queering elementary education:

209

Advancing the dialogue about sexualities and schooling (pp. 183-193). Lanham, MD:
Roman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Huskey, M. (2002). Queering the picture book. The Lion and the Unicorn, 26, 66-77.
Jackson, S. (2006). Gender, sexuality, and heterosexuality: The complexity (and limits) of
heteronormativity. Feminist Theory, 7(1), 105-121.
Jagose, A. (1996). Queer theory: An introduction. New York: New York University Press.
Janks, H. (2010). Language, power and pedagogies. Sociolinguistics and language education,
40-61.
Janks, H. (1993). Language, Identity, & Power. Johannesburg: Hodder & Stoughton in
association with Witwatersrand Press.
Janmohamed, Z. (2010). Queering early childhood studies: Challenging the discourse of
developmentally appropriate practice. The Alberta Journal of Education Research, 56
(3), 304-318.
Johnson, B. (1993). Teacher-As-Researcher. ERIC digest. Washington, D.C.:
Clearinghouse.
Korenhaus, C., & Demarest, J. (1993). Gender roles stereotyping in children’s literature: An
update. Sex Roles, 28(3/4), 219-232.
Kosciw, J. G., & Diaz, E.M. (2008). Involved, Invisible, Ignored: The experiences of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender parents and their children in our nation’s k-12 schools.
Gay, Lesbian, Straight Education Network (GLSEN). 121 West 27th Street Suite 804,
New York, NY 1001.
Kumashiro, K. K. (2004). Uncertain beginnings: Learning to teach paradoxically. Theory into
Practice, 43(2), 111-115.

210

Lankshear, C., & McLauren, P. (1993). Critical literacy: Politics, Praxis, and the Postmodern.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Larson, J. & Marsh, J. (2005). Making Literacy Real: Theories and Practices for Learning and
Teaching. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Leaper, C., & Smith, T. E. (2004). A meta-analytic review of gender variations in children’s
language use: Talkativeness, Affiliative Speech, and Assertive Speech. Developmental
Psychology, 40(6)993-1027.
Leland, C., Harste, J., & Smith, K. (2005). Out of the box: Critical literacy in a first-grade
classroom. Language Arts, 82, 257-268.
Letts, W. J., & Sears, J. T. (Eds.) (1999). Queering elementary education: Advancing the
dialogue about sexualities and schooling. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Lipkin, A. (2002). The challenges of gay topics in teacher education: Politics, content, and
pedagogy. Getting ready for Benjamin: Preparing classroom teachers for sexual
diversity in the classroom, 13-27.
Lipkin, A. (1993). The case of a gay and lesbian curriculum. The High School Journal, 77(1/2),
95-107.
Lugg, C.A. (2003). Sissies, faggots, lezzies, and dykes : Gender, sexual orientation, and a new
politics of education? Educational Administration Quarterly, 39(1), 95-134.
Luhmann, S. (1998). Queering/querying pedagogy? Or, pedagogy is a pretty queer thing. Queer
Theory in Education, 141-155.
Macgillivray, I. K., & Jennings, T. (2008). A content analysis exploring lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender topics in foundations of education textbooks. Journal of Teacher
Education, 59(2), 170-188.

211

Mallan, K. M. (2011). Queer. Keywords for Children’s Literature. New York University Press.
New York.
Martino, W., & Mellor, B. (2000). Gendered fictions. Urbana, Ill.: National Council of Teachers
of English.
McLaughlin, M., & DeVoogd, G. (2004). Critical literacy as comprehension: Expanding reader
response. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 48, 58-62.
Mayo, C. (2014). LGBTQ Youth and Education: Policies and practices. New York: Teachers
College Press, Columbia University.
Mayo, C. (2006). Pushing the limits of liberalism: Queerness, children, and the future.
Educational Theory, 56(4), 469-487.
Maxwell, J. A. (2013). Qualitative Research Design: An interactive approach (3rd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1994). An expanded sourcebook: Qualitative Data Analysis
(2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Moje, E., B., Young, J.P. Readence, J.E., & Moore D.W. (2000). Reinventing adolescent literacy
for new times: Perennial and millennial issues. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy,
43, 400-411.
Moita-Lopes, L. P. (2006). Queering literacy teaching: Analyzing gay-themed discourses in a
fifth-grade class in Brazil. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 5(1), 31-50.
Oliver, K.L., & Lalik, R. (2000). Bodily knowledge: Learning about equity and justice with
adolescent girls. Adolescent Cultures, School and Society, Vol. 11. Peter Lang, Customer
Service.

212

Oswald, R. F., Blume, L. B., & Marks, S.R. (2005). Decentering heteronormativity: A model for
family studies. In V. L. Bengston, A.C. Acock, K.R. Allen, P. Dilsworth-Anderson, &
D.M. Klein (Eds.), Sourcebook of Family Theory & Research (pp.143-154). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods (3rd ed.). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Pinar, W. F. (1998). Understanding curriculum as gender text: Notes on reproduction, resistance,
and male-male relations. In Pinar, W. F. (Ed.), Queer theory in education (pp.221-243).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Pollen, A. (2011). Performing spectacular girlhood: Mass-produced dressing-up costumes and
the commodification of imagination. Textile History, 42(2), 162-180.
Progroff, I. (1992). At a Journal Workshop: Writing to access the power of the unconscious and
evoke creative ability. New York: Putman.
Queen, M., Farrell, K., & Gupta, N. (2005). Interrupting heteronormativity. Syracuse, N.Y.:
Graduate School of Syracuse University.
Quintero, E. (2009). Critical literacy in early childhood education: Artful story & the
integrated curriculum. New York: Peter Lang.
Quintero, E. P., & Rummel, M.K. (2004). Becoming a teacher in the new society: Bringing
communities and classrooms together. New York: Peter Lang.
Reid, M. (2014, March 24). Club Controversy: Gay-straight alliance create backlash. Retrieved
from http://fox8.com/2014/03/24/club-controversy-gay-straight-alliance-createsbacklash/.

213

Rice, P. S. (2002). Creating spaces for boys and girls to expand their definitions of masculinity
and femininity through children’s literature. Journal of Children’s Literature, 28(2), 3342.
Rich, A. (1980). Compulsory heterosexuality and lesbian existence. Signs, 5(4), 631-660.
Richards, L. & Morse, J. M. (2007). Read me first: A user’s guide to qualitative methods (2nd
ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Rowell, E. (2007). Picture books reflecting gay and lesbian families. Young Children, 62(3), 2430.
Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. (2012) Qualitative data: The art of hearing data. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Ryan, C. L., Patraw, J. M., Bednar, M. (2013). Discussing princess boys and pregnant men:
Teaching about gender diversity and transgender experiences within an elementary
school curriculum. Journal of LGBTQ Youth, 10 (1-2) 83-105.
Ryan, C. L., & Hermann-Wilmarth, J.M. (2013). Already on the shelf queer readings of awardwinning children’s literature. Journal of Literacy Research, 45(2), 142-172.
Ryan, C. L. (2010). “How do you spell family?” Literacy, Heteronormativity, and Young
Children of Lesbian Mothers (Doctoral dissertation), The Ohio State University.
Sapp, J. (2010). A review of gay and lesbian themed early childhood children’s literature.
Australasian Journal of Early Childhood, 35(1), 32.
Sargis, J. (2008). Libratory Education for Autonomy. International Journal of Inclusive
Democracy, 4(3).
Schall, J. & Kauffmann. (2003). Exploring literature with gay and lesbian characters in the
elementary school. Journal of Children’s Literature, 29(1), 36-45.

214

Schneider, J. J. (2001). No blood, guns, or gays allowed! The silencing of the elementary writer.
Language Arts, 78(5), 415-425.
Sears, J. T. (2009). Interrogating the subject: Queering elementary education, 10 years on. Sex
Education, 9(2), 193-200.
Sears, J. T. (1991). Helping students understand and accept sexual diversity. Educational
Leadership, 49(1) 54-56. Sedgwick, E. K. (1990). Epistemology of the Closet.
Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in education
and the social sciences (3rded.). New York: Teachers College Press.
Sherman, D. (2002). Passion and pedagogy: Relation, creation, and transformation in teaching.
New York: Peter Lang.
Sipe, L. R. (2008). Storytime: Young children's literary understanding in the classroom. New
York: Teachers College Press.
Skattebol, J. (2006). Playing boys: The body, identity and belonging in the early years. Gender
and Education, 18(5), 507-522.
Slotnick, R.C., & Janesick, V.J. (2011). Conversations on method: Deconstructing policy
through the researcher reflective journal. The Qualitative Report, 16(5), 1352-1360.
Smargorinsky, P. (2008). The method section as conceptual epicenter in constructing social
science research reports. Written Communication, 25(3), 389-411.
Smith Amos, D. (2011, July 15) Study: For GLBT students, school in Ohio still no picnic. The
Cincinnati Enquirer, p. 21.
Smolkin, L. B., & Young, C.A. (2011). Missing mirrors, missing windows: Children’s literature
textbooks and LGBT topics. Language Arts, 88(3), 217.

215

Soloman, S. (2004). Kids say the funniest things…anti-homophobia group work in the
classroom. Teaching Education, 15(1), 103-106.
Souto-Manning, M., & Hermann-Wilmarth, J. (2008). Teacher inquires into gay and lesbian
families in early childhood classrooms. Journal of Early Childhood Research, 6(3), 263280.
Stitzlein, S. M. (2008). Breaking Bad Habits of Race and Gender: Transforming Identity in
Schools. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Stitzlein, S. (2007). Skill and persistence in gender crossing and nonconformity among children.
Journal of Gay and Lesbian Issues in Education, 4(2), 13-31.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures
and techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Street, B. (1995). Social literacies: Critical perspectives on literacy in development,
ethnography, and education. London: Longman.
Swartz, P.C. (2003). Bridging multicultural education: Bringing sexual orientation into the
children’s and young adult literature classrooms. The Radical Teacher, 66, 11-16.
Talburt, S. (2004). Ethnographic responsibility without the “real”. Journal of Higher Education,
75(1), 80-103.
Taylor, F. (2003). Content analysis and gender stereotypes in children’s books. Teaching
Sociology, 300-311.
Tennessee schools block LGBT websites. (2009, July-August). Curve, 19(6), 31. Retrieved from
(June 2014)http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA203140787&v=2.1&u=
ucinc_main&itr&p=EAIM&sw=w&asid=e324e7e92fb56a354c78a9998e76ba9c.

216

Thein, A.H., Kavanagh, K. M., & Fink, L. (2013). Language arts teachers’ resistance to teaching
LGBT literature and issues. Language Arts, 90(3), 169.
Thorne, B., & Luria, Z. (1986). Sexuality and gender in children’s daily worlds. Social
Problems, 176-190.
Trepanier-Street, M.L., & Romatowski, J.A. (1999). The influence of children’s literature on
gender role perceptions: A reexamination. Early Childhood Education Journal, 26(3),
155-159.
Troyna, B. & Vincent, C. (1995). The discourses of social justice in education. Discourse:
studies in the cultural politics of education, 16(2), 149-166.
Tsao, Y. L. (2008). Gender issues in young children’s literature. Reading Improvement, 45(3),
108.
Vail, K. (2005). Teaching about sexuality. American School Board Journal, 192, 18-21.
Vasquez, V. M. (2010). Getting beyond "I like the book": Creating space for critical literacy in
K-6 classrooms (2nd ed.). Newark, Del: International Reading Association.
Vasquez, V. M. (2007). Using the everyday to engage in critical literacy with young children.
North England Reader Association Journal, 43(2), 6-11.
Vasquez, V. M. (2004). Negotiating critical literacies with young children. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Vetter, A. M. (2010). “Cause I’m a G”. Identity work of a lesbian teen in language arts. Journal
of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 54(2), 98-108.
Vicars, M. (2009). Textual encounters and pedagogic interventions. Pedagogy, Culture &
Society, 17(3), 311-322.

217

Warner, M. (Ed.). (1993). Fear of queer planet: Queer politics and social theory (Vol. 6). U of
Minnesota Press.
Whelan, D.L. (2006). Out and ignored: Why are so many school libraries reluctant to embrace
gay teens? School Library Journal, 52(1), 46.
Whitson, J. M. (1992). Sexuality and censorship in the curriculum: Beyond formalistic legal
analysis. In Sears, J.T. (Ed.), Sexuality and the Curriculum: The politics and practices of
sexuality education. (pp.59-77). New York: Teachers College Press.
Wilchins, R. (2004). Queer Theory. Gender Theory: An Instant Primer.
Wolfe, R. B. (2006). Choosing to include gay issues in early childhood teacher preparation
coursework: One professor’s journey. Journal of Early Childhood Teacher Education,
27(2), 195-204.
Wood, J. W. (2005). Mose’s story: Critical literacy and social justice in an urban kindergarten.
Young Children: Beyond the Journal. Voices of Practitioners, 1-12.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and method (3nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Young, J.P. (2000). Boy talk: Critical literacy and masculinities. Reading Research Quarterly,
35(3), 312-337.
Children’s Literature and Films:
Barrett, J., & Nickle, J. (2008). Never take a shark to the dentist. London: Simon and Schuster.
Berenstain, S. (2008). Berenstain Bears’ : Bedtime Battle. Paw Prints.
Bourgeois, P. (2012). Hurry up, Franklin. New York: Scholastic.
Bridwell, N. (2010). Clifford’s family. New York: Scholastic.
Brown, M.T. (2004). The world of Arthur and friends. New York: Little Brown.

218

Bynum, B. K., & Parod, C.A. (2013). I’m a pretty little black girl!
Cloudy with a chance of meatballs [Motion picture]. (2009). Sony.
Cole, B. (1986). Princess Smartypants. New York: Putnam.
Considine, K. (2005). Emma and Meesha my boy: A two mom story. West Hartford, Conn: Two
Mom Books.
de Haan, L. & Nijland, S. (2000). King & King. New York: Tricycle Press.
Donaldson, J. (2003). Room on the broom. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers.
Ewert, M. (2008). 10,000 dresses. New York: Seven Stories Press.
Falconer, I. (2012). Olivia and the fairy princess. New York: Atheneum Books for Young
Readers.
Filipek, N. (2003). Fun to Learn: Opposites. Kettering Northamptonshire, UK: Book Studio.
Frozen. [Motion picture]. (2013). Santa Monica, CA: Arc Entertainment.
Gannaway, B., & Hernandez, A. (2014). Planes, fire, & rescue. New York: Golden Books.
Halls, K. M., & Spears, R. (2006). Tales of the Cryptids. Plain City, OH: Darby Creek Pub.
Herman, G. (2003). Halloween howl. New York: Scholastic.
Hilton, P. (2011). The boy with pink hair. New York: Celebra Children’s Books.
Keane, D. & Brunkus, D. (2009). Sloppy Joe. New York: Harper.
Kilodavis, C. (2010). My Princess Boy: A mom's story about a young boy who loves to dress up.
New York: Aladdin.
Lithgow, J., & Neubecker, R. (2008). I got two dogs. New York: Simon & Schuster Books for
Young Readers.
Lopshire, R. (1960). Put me in the zoo. New York: Beginner Books; Random House.
Lum, K. (2002). What! cried Granny: An almost bedtime story. New York: Dial Books for

219

Young Readers.
Matheson, A. (2014). I love to sing. Toronto: Flowerpot Press.
Mermaidia Barbie Fairytopia [Motion picture]. (2012). California: Mattel, Inc.
Munsch, R. N. (1995). The Paper Bag Princess. Toronto: Annick Press.
Newman, L. (2011). Donovan's Big Day. Berkeley, CA: Tricycle Press.
O’Conner, J. (2013). Fancy Nancy and the posh puppy. New York: HarperCollins.
Oelschlager, V. (2010). A tale of two daddies. Akron, OH: Vanita Books.
Okimoto, J. D., Aoki, E. M. (2002). The White Swan Express: A story about adoption. New
York: Clarion Books.
Parr, T. (2010). The Family Book. New York: Little, Brown.
Scotton, R. (2012). Splat the cat: The rain is a pain. New York: Harper.
Seuss. D. (2003). Happy birthday to you! New York: Random House.
Shannon, D. (2002). David gets in trouble. New York: Blue Sky Press.
Sophia the first: Once upon a princess [Motion picture] (2013). Burbank, CA: Walt Disney
Studios.
Star wars [Motion picture]. (1977). Los Angeles, CA: Lucasfulm.
Teenage mutant ninja turtles [Motion picture] (2015). S.I.: Warner Home Video.
Thaler, M., & Lee, J.D. (2008). The class pet from the Black Lagoon. New York: Cartwheel
Books.
The Frog Prince [Motion picture]. (2009). Briarcliff Manor, NY: Benchmark Films.
The Princess and the Frog [Motion picture]. (2009). Burbank, CA: Walt Disney Studios.

220

Appendix A
Page
Student Rejects

221

Appendix B
Page
Student Replicates

222

Appendix C
Page
Student Replicates

223

Appendix D
Page
Student Replicates

224

Appendix E
Page
Student Replicates

225

Appendix F
Page
Student Recreates

226

Appendix G
Page
Student Recreates

227

Appendix H
Page
Student Recreates

228

Appendix I
Jerry
Student Rejects

229

Appendix J
Jerry
Student Rejects

230

Appendix K
Jerry
Student Replicates

231

Appendix L
Jerry
Student Replicates

232

Appendix M
Jerry
Student Replicates

233

Appendix N
Jerry
Student Recreates

234

Appendix O
Jerry
Student Recreates

235

Appendix P
Hank
Student Rejects

236

Appendix Q
Hank
Student Rejects

237

Appendix R
Hank
Student Replicates

238

Appendix S
Hank
Student Replicates

239

Appendix T
Hank
Student Replicates

240

Appendix U
Hank
Student Replicates

241

Appendix V
Hank
Student Recreates

242

Appendix W
Hank
Student Recreates

243

Appendix X
Hank
Student Recreates

244

Appendix Y
Hank
Student Recreates

245

Appendix Z
Hank
Student Recreates

246

