Roman Battle Sarcophagi:
An Analysis of Composition as a Reflection of Changing Imperial Styles and Production

A thesis submitted to the
Graduate School
of the University of Cincinnati
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts

in the Department of Classics
of the College of Arts and Sciences
by

Sarah Beal

B.A. The Ohio State University
May 2014

Committee Chair: B. Burrell, Ph.D.

Abstract
Roman sarcophagi that show battle scenes were produced in Italy during the Antonine
period. These scenes are completely devoid of mythological figures and likely represent real
battles from Rome’s history, in which Roman soldiers fought wild barbarians. Past scholars, such
as Per Gustaf Hamberg and Bernard Andreae, have studied the iconography and compositions of
these battle sarcophagi; however, they have yet to be reexamined in light of recent developments
in the study of sarcophagus production.
This thesis seeks to examine the compositions of Roman battle sarcophagi in order to
answer questions about their production. It considers the precedents for such battle scenes, from
Classical grave stelai to grand imperial monuments. This study demonstrates how the battle
sarcophagi expand upon trends already seen in imperial art of the Antonine period, while
incorporating stylistic elements from Hellenistic sculptures.
Next, the compositions of the battle scenes are examined, in which the prevalence of
specific figural types and groups that are repeated on the full corpus of battle sarcophagi are
noted. Many of these figural types are identical to Roman copies of the Attalid victory statues,
leading to the argument that the compositions of the Roman battle sarcophagi were inspired not
by a single painted prototype, as suggested by Andreae, but instead are the gathered collection of
various statuary forms that were applied to a relief.
This thesis then discusses various models of production in order to show that the Roman
battle sarcophagi support the heterogeneous model developed by Ben Russell. While some
workshops were large enough to maintain a stock of completed works to be sold off the shelf,
others were much smaller, only creating commissioned works.

ii

Finally, the figural types on the battle sarcophagi are examined alongside the figural
types on sarcophagi that show Amazonomachies. This examination brings to light the similarities
between these two sarcophagus types. This thesis argues that these similarities in composition
are evidence that a workshop could rough out a generic battle narrative on a sarcophagus, to
which finer details could later be applied according to the wishes of the customer in order to
transform the scene into either an Amazonomachy or a battle between Romans and barbarians.
The figures of Roman soldiers and Amazons in these scenes would have been interchangeable,
which suggests complexities in how the Romans viewed these female warriors.

iii

iv

Acknowledgments
The completion of this thesis would not have been possible without the support of various
individuals. First and foremost, I would like to express my great appreciation to Barbara Burrell
for her tireless encouragement. From my first semester at UC, she has inspired me to change the
way I approach my research and to ask questions of the material which I never would have
imagined on my own. Through our many impromptu brainstorming sessions and her constant
enthusiasm for my work and our field, she has provided me with extraordinary guidance for
completing this thesis with a smile on my face. I also wish to express my gratitude to Kathleen
Lynch, who has always been willing to find time to meet with me and to discuss the more
tedious aspects of this thesis. She is a constant model for how to balance scholarship, outreach,
and free time, for which I am indebted.
Gratitude is also due to my many colleagues who were a constant source of
encouragement throughout this process. In particular, I wish to thank Alice Crowe, who was
always readily available to bounce around ideas, Simone Agrimonti, who was a constant help
with his optimism and Italian language skills, and Carina Moss, who was continually available to
listen. A very special thank you goes to Aaron Caffrey and Sylvia Czander, who both found time
in their busy schedules to help me with editing.
Finally, I wish to thank my family for always supporting my love of Classics. From my
sisters who taught me how to dig in the dirt, to my mother who encouraged me to major in
Classics in undergrad and my father who inspired my love of travel, they have never questioned
my desire to enter this field, for which I am eternally grateful. Thanks also to Chris Kanner, who
has endured many months of me talking about sarcophagi and has always at least pretended to be
interested.
v

Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Introduction ……………………………………………………………… pp. 1-5
Chapter 2: Past Scholarship ……………………………………………………….… pp. 6-15
Sarcophagi in Context
Production
Roman Battle Sarcophagi
Other Battle Scenes
Conclusion
Chapter 3: Earlier Precedents ………………………………………………....…… pp. 16-28
Athenian Grave Stele
Alexander Sarcophagus
Altar of Zeus at Pergamon
Dedications by Attlid Kings
Paintings and Painted Panels
Conclusion
Chapter 4: Imperial Reliefs …………………………………………………..……… pp. 29-43
Column of Trajan
Great Trajanic Frieze
Column of Marcus Aurelius
Arch of Septimius Severus
Conclusion
Chapter 5: Compositions and Iconography ……………………………..….……… pp. 44-73
Figural Types and Groups
Other Trends in Composition
Iconography
Conclusion

vi

Chapter 6: Workshops and Production ………………………………….………… pp. 74-82
Models of Production
Production of Battle Sarcophagi
Conclusion
Chapter 7: Amazonomachies on Sarcophagi ……………………………………… pp. 83-94
Amazonomachies
Sculpting Workshops
Conclusion
Chapter 8: Conclusion …………………...……………………………….………… pp. 95-98
Bibliography ………………………………………………………………………… pp. 99-114
Catalogue of Roman Battle Sarcophagi …………………………………………… pp. 115-148
Images ……………………………………………………………………………….. pp. 149-180

vii

Chapter 1: Introduction
The mid-2nd century CE, known as the Antonine period, saw the longstanding Roman
burial practice of cremation give way to the rapidly popularized method of inhumation in a
sarcophagus. Sarcophagus production and distribution exploded during this period, as evidenced
by the sudden prevalence of sarcophagus burials, though there is little consensus as to the reason
for this change in practice.1 These marble caskets held a prominent position within Roman burial
practices, being displayed during funerals and ultimately placed within the familial tomb. Here
the sarcophagus would be regularly visited by the family, at future funerals and during the yearly
Parentalia, a nine-day festival held to honor the ancestors. As a result, Roman sarcophagi were
elaborately decorated for the conspicuous display of both wealth and highly honored virtues.
There were three main types of sarcophagi produced throughout the Roman world,
named for where they are believed to have been produced. Attic sarcophagi are decorated on all
four sides, and usually conform to a standard size and shape. These sarcophagi present a wide
array of scenes, especially stories from mythology, though they sometimes show battles of
Greeks fighting against a barbaric enemy. Though these battles may be somewhat historical, they
are mythologized by the nudity of all of the figures. Asiatic sarcophagi can be distinguished by
the use of columns to frame the scenes, breaking a continuous narrative in individual figures and
groupings. These sarcophagi most often depict various mythological figures. Roman sarcophagi
are decorated on only three sides, with the fourth side left blank as they were often placed against
a wall. The sizes and shapes of these sarcophagi are extremely variable. Roman sarcophagi from
this period are decorated with a wide range of motifs, from mythological scenes to biographical

1

For major works on sarcophagi in general, see Die antiken Sarkophagreliefs; Sarkophag-Studien; Koch and
Sichtermann 1982; Zanker and Ewald 2004; Elsner and Huskinson 2011; Birk 2013.

1

representations of daily life. These biographical scenes almost always feature allegorical figures
and are more focused on the repetition of imperial virtues rather than true biography.
Much scholarship on Roman sarcophagi has been focused on iconography, such as Die
antiken Sarkophagreliefs series, published over the last 100 years, which is organized according
to the various iconographic types for all Roman sarcophagi. This and other iconographic studies
have allowed for a wider examination of the stylistic and ideological changes that occurred
during the imperial period. The Sarkophag-Studien series is similarly centered on iconographic
studies, with the exception of the most recent volume by Katharina Meinecke.2 Meinecke’s
volume is part of a rising trend towards attempting to contextualize sarcophagi, which includes
new discussions on sarcophagus placement within the tomb context, production techniques, and
the identification of workshops. Further studies have focused on the changing ideologies
occurring during the Antonine period, as reflected on the sarcophagi.3
This thesis will focus on Roman sarcophagi that feature a battle between Romans and
barbarians on the main front side. This group is distinct in that they represent real Romans
fighting in chaotic battles, rather than showing mythologized versions of warfare. Whereas most
Roman sarcophagi feature Greek myths or biographical characters interacting with mythological
figures, the battle scenes are completely devoid of mythological figures.4 The resulting
compositions go beyond the typological representation of virtues found on biographical
sarcophagi and instead extend into the realm of historical representations of real battles. Because
the group of battle sarcophagi is small, it allows for a closer and more detailed study than may be

2

Meinecke 2014.
See Hölscher 2003; 2004.
4
There is the exception of the few battle sarcophagi which are framed by winged Victories, but these deities do not
directly interact with the main action of the scene.
3

2

possible with a larger sample set. These battle sarcophagi are worthy of closer examination as
they reflect the stylistic trends occurring on imperial art throughout this period, as well as the
dominant imperial virtues which were gaining prominence. They are a small and short-lived
group, traditionally ranging in date from about 160-200 CE, with one later example dated to
around 220 CE.
Only a few of the eighteen sarcophagi included in this study have known findspots, and
all of them lack associated finds. As a result, only general findspots can be determined based on
the collection history of these objects and their current locations in museums, and further
contextualization must rely entirely upon stylistic and compositional considerations. Fortunately,
sarcophagi are a widely researched and published medium of Roman art, making it possible to
examine stylistic development on a large scale.
Of the Roman battle sarcophagi included in this study, most have decoration on the two
shorter sides and some have upper friezes; however, this thesis will focus on the main battle
scenes alone. The shorter sides of the sarcophagi are here ignored as not all of the sarcophagi
have side scenes, and the sides that have been preserved and published are often badly damaged.
Additionally, the front scenes on Roman sarcophagi, which are carved in deeper relief than the
sides, are the primary scenes. Upper friezes for sarcophagi are problematic, as many of the lids
assigned to sarcophagi by private collections and in museums do not belong with their cases. By
focusing on the main scenes alone, it is possible to study the battle scenes in greater detail, and
the results of this thesis will not be contaminated by the uncertainty of the side and upper reliefs.
In addition to lacking mythological figures, these Roman battle sarcophagi always feature
Roman soldiers who are dressed in full uniform. This further distinguishes them from Attic battle
scenes, which usually feature nude men. The nudity on the Attic sarcophagi serves to elevate the
3

battles beyond reality. By contrast, the lack of mythological figures and the clothing of the
soldiers suggest that the battles shown on the Roman battle sarcophagi were intended to
represent either historical or contemporary battle scenes, fought by real Roman men against a
real enemy. Owing to the uniqueness of their depiction, the Roman battle sarcophagi have been
discussed in past within the context of general stylistic and iconographic trends, but no one has
tried to further contextualize these sarcophagi within growing discussions of production.5
In this thesis, I will show that by conducting a thorough and comprehensive examination
of the compositions of all Roman battle sarcophagi that date from roughly the mid-2nd to mid-3rd
centuries CE, it is possible to reconstruct the role of these sarcophagi within the greater context
of Roman funerary practices, ideologies, and production. In particular I will consider how these
sarcophagi reflect the changing imperial values and styles of the period, as well as how their
compositions allow us to reconstruct the production process. This thesis will attempt to
contextualize the sarcophagi in three ways.
First, I will examine the earlier and contemporary precedents for depictions of battles.
This will involve a consideration of Classical and Hellenistic Greek monuments and statues. In
addition, I will consider the changing artistic styles occurring in imperial monuments throughout
the Antonine period. From this examination, I will show how the Roman battle sarcophagi were
inspired by Hellenistic statuary groups, which emphasize extreme emotion and dramatic body
movements, while at the same time reflecting new innovations of representation that were being
explored on imperial reliefs.

5

Such as Hamberg 1945 and Andreae 1956, both to be discussed below.

4

Second, I will bring the Roman battle sarcophagi into the recent discussions of
sarcophagus production. By examining the various compositional types and figural groups that
are found on the battle sarcophagi, I will show how four of the sarcophagi must come from a
single workshop, while the others were produced at a wide variety of workshops. The battle
sarcophagi therefore support a heterogeneous model of sarcophagus production, in which small
workshops and larger workshops capable of supporting a stock of product were working within
the same market.
Finally, I will turn to the Roman Amazonomachy sarcophagi.6 These sarcophagi similarly
show battles, though these are mythological battles between Greeks and Amazons. The
Amazonomachy was a popular motif on Roman sarcophagi throughout the Antonine period and
long outlived the battle sarcophagi after the turn of the 3rd century. Unlike the battle sarcophagi,
which show historical battles, the Amazonomachy sarcophagi represent myth. I will show how
the compositional groups and figural types used on the Amazonomachy sarcophagi are similar to
those on the Roman battle sarcophagi, despite their different intentions. From this evidence, it is
possible to reconstruct a model in which a sculpting workshop could rough out the design of a
generic battle on a sarcophagus, to which final details could be applied to alter the scene into
either a battle between Romans and barbarians or an Amazonomachy.

6

Unfortunately, the Attic Amazon sarcophagi lie beyond the scope of this study, but may provide useful
comparanda for future studies.

5

Chapter 2: Past Scholarship
Sarcophagi in Context
The field of sarcophagus studies has long been dominated by iconographic investigations
that often ignore the contexts of the sarcophagi, as in Die antiken Sarcophagreliefs series.
Nevertheless, there has been a more recent shift towards the study of sarcophagi within their
tomb contexts and the sarcophagus trade, a trend that has most recently been undertaken by the
Sarkophag-Studien series.
In his examination of the burial practices and rituals in ancient Rome, Ian Morris argued
that, while cremation was the most popular or possibly even the only burial practice of Rome in
the 1st century CE, at some point during the 2nd century CE, inhumation quickly took over as the
dominant practice within Rome.7 This is often attributed to the so-called “classical revival” or
“Hellenization” of Rome, as inhumation had long been considered a lavish eastern practice, and
is particularly associated with philhellenic emperors such as Hadrian.
In her book on burial customs in 3rd century Rome, Barbara Borg examined the role of a
sarcophagus within the specific context of the tomb.8 The tombs themselves took a variety of
forms, from simple chambers to more elaborate temple tombs and mausolea. Within these tombs,
various niches and arcosolia line the walls to hold cremation urns and sarcophagi. Whereas
sarcophagi are often now treated as display pieces, featured prominently in museums, Borg
argued that sarcophagi in their original contexts were just one part of a series of decorative
choices, from the design of the tomb structure to the painting upon the walls. Sarcophagi could

7
8

Morris 1992, pp. 31-69. See also Koch and Sichtermann 1982, pp. 27-30.
Borg 2013, pp. 213-240.

6

either be set up as the primary or secondary feature of the tomb, with some sarcophagi in later
periods even being buried in the floor of the tomb and thus remaining invisible despite their
lavish decoration.9 The iconography and design were still the most important part of a
sarcophagus, even on the invisible sarcophagi, as the box would have been displayed during the
funerary procession or the eulogy, with its specific scene intended to express the values of the
deceased or of the family.10 Sarcophagi as primary features would often be framed in niches and
aediculae or raised on a platform for greater visibility. This was particularly common for nonelite tombs, basic tomb structures that served a wider range of peoples beyond a single family
and were therefore frequently visited. The more frequent use of non-elite tombs by multiple
families and various users, such as a collegia, allowed the sarcophagi themselves to be more
repeatedly viewed. Borg further argued that, especially nearing the 3rd century CE, marble cost
more than the labor of the sculptor to carve the sarcophagus, and therefore the size of the
sarcophagus became more important than before. As a result, the figures on sarcophagi became
larger and the scenes more readable.11
Katharina Meinecke also studied sarcophagi in context in her PhD thesis, which was later
expanded into Sarcophagum Posuit.12 Meinecke examined 129 different contexts from the 1st-3rd
centuries CE which held 239 sarcophagi. She carefully considered all aspects of these burials, as
well as the available information about burial rituals and funerary cults. Ultimately, Meinecke
demonstrated that there is no single homogeneous model for sarcophagus burial, supporting
Borg’s discussion of sarcophagi as primary or secondary features. She further argued that there is
no concrete evidence for continued funerary commemoration occurring directly beside the
9

Borg 2013, pp. 229-235.
Pearson 1999, pp. 72-94, 124.
11
Borg 2013, pp. 236-240.
12
Meinecke 2014; 2013.
10

7

sarcophagi. Sarcophagi would still be viewed as more bodies were interred, but this was not the
intention of visits to the tomb. According to Meinecke’s interpretation, once a sarcophagus was
interred, viewing the sarcophagus would have been an unintended result of future burials.
Production
Due to the deeply personal nature of burial, scholars long believed that sarcophagi were
made according to orders placed by consumers. This production-to-order model was questioned
by John Ward-Perkins’ 1980 study of the evidence for marble trade at Nicomedia.13 Citing
evidence for mass-production, such as the various sarcophagus shapes that were roughed out at
quarries and the standardization of column lengths, Ward-Perkins proposed a sarcophagus
industry in which sarcophagi were produced and fully completed, to be held at workshops and
sold off the shelf. Ward-Perkins argued that this production-to-stock model would allow families
to quickly purchase completed sarcophagi, which was necessary owing to the immediacy of
death.
More recently, Ben Russell has reexamined sarcophagus production, in an attempt to
understand better the organization of the marble trade as it pertains to sarcophagi.14 Russell,
responding to the mass-production model brought forth by Ward-Perkins, saw the sarcophagus
trade as a complex relationship of supply and demand between the consumer, the marble
sculptor, and the quarry. He reconstructed a heterogeneous model of sarcophagus production, in
which some workshops were able to maintain a stock of mostly completed sarcophagi, while the

13
14

Ward-Perkins 1980, pp. 325-338.
Russell 2013, pp. 256-310.

8

majority of workshops were small and produced in accordance with consumer demand. These
models of production will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Carl Robert created a system of classification for
sarcophagi, separating them into three main categories: decorative, mythological, and
biographical.15 Paul Zanker and Bjӧrn Ewald argued that the latter two categories should not be
considered to be entirely separate, instead seeing the influences of mythological motifs on
historical depictions.16 Accordingly, sarcophagus sculptors, faced with a new challenge of
representing not only the heroic side of battle but also the tragedy, turned to mythological scenes
as the basis for their depictions. Zanker and Ewald drew numerous pictorial parallels between
scenes of heroic deeds, especially boar and lion hunts, and biographical sarcophagi. While these
parallels undoubtedly exist in the sarcophagus corpus due to the overwhelming influence of
Classical and Hellenistic themes on all Roman art, it is equally beneficial to consider the
biographical scenes independently of mythological styles, allowing one to better understand the
evolution of biographical scenes within their socio-political context of Antonine art. The battle
sarcophagi stand out within this evolution as a short-lived style that captured the stylistic trends
and dramatic representations of war found in imperial art from this period. These sarcophagi
combine biographical depictions with historical themes.
Battle Sarcophagi
Two major studies have been done on the battle sarcophagi. The most influential work
appears in the 1945 book by Per Gustaf Hamberg titled Studies in Roman Imperial Art.17 In his

15

See Robert 1897-1919. Zanker and Ewald (2012, pp. 18-21) discussed the history of the study of Roman
sarcophagi over the past 100+ years.
16
Zanker and Ewald 2012, pp. 44-46.
17
Hamberg 1945, pp. 172-189.

9

section on “Antonine Battle Sarcophagi,” Hamberg examined five battle sarcophagi and their
role in glorifying the deceased. Without discussing exact dates, Hamberg identified a stylistic
transition from the earliest to the latest examples. Beginning with the Ammendola sarcophagus,
which Hamberg assigned to the beginning of the reign of Marcus Aurelius, battle scenes were
composed of disparate figures that lacked true unity. Later examples, such as the Portonaccio
sarcophagus which Hamberg saw as roughly contemporary with the Column of Marcus Aurelius,
featured more cohesive scenes. Finally Hamberg recognized the latest iteration of battle
sarcophagi that depict what appear to be actual battle tactics, as seen on the Large Villa Doria
Pamphili sarcophagus from the turn of the century. He therefore noted a transition, not only from
disparate to more cohesive compositions, but also from mythological to more historical
representations of battle. This tendency towards greater realism allowed artists to abandon the
balance and rhythm of Classical scenes in favor of the forms achieved by the Hellenistic style,
characterized by its confused compositions of overlapping and disorganized figures and its
explicit presentation of unrestrained emotions. Hamberg identified this shift in style as a direct
reflection of a “spiritual change” born from a greater appreciation for the tragic consequences of
frequent war, which allowed the viewer to participate personally in the experience, as seen on the
Column of Marcus Aurelius. Similarly, there was a change in the understanding of contemporary
history and a new interest in reality that resulted from a continuing threat from “Northern
peoples.”18 There was ultimately a reversal of this trend by the reign of Septimius Severus,
identified by Hamberg on the Large Ludovisi sarcophagus, upon which the depiction of reality
was abandoned in favor of a battle trope, an idealistic representation of what war should be. The
commander figure on this sarcophagus is placed at the center, surrounded by a series of

18

Hamberg 1945, p. 186.

10

assembled yet individual groups that depict an ideal of the enemy. Hamberg was the first to
present a holistic examination of this stylistic group and to question its historical and social
impact.
Both Roman and Attic battle sarcophagi were discussed by Bernard Andreae in his 1956
book, Motivgeschichtliche Untersuchungen zu den römischen Schlachtsarkophagen. Andreae
closely examined the sarcophagi and identified various repeated figures and figural groups
within the various compositions. Although he catalogued 21 battle sarcophagi, including 4 Attic
ones, Andreae chose to focus on four sarcophagi in particular, due to their compositional
similarities: the Ammendola (1), the Via Tiburtina (4), the Small Villa Doria Pamphili (3), and
the Small Ludovisi (5).19 He examined the figural representations on these sarcophagi in depth,
finding similarities in the types of figures used and the artistic methods employed to represent
the chaos of battle, as well as identifying parallels for these fighting types and group schemes in
Hellenistic art. Andreae, however, found Hellenistic forms, such as the various Attilid sculptures,
to be unsatisfying models, owing to small differences in stylistic choice. He argued that, because
the sarcophagi were made to order, no stock of sarcophagi would have been available for
workshops to copy, and the iconography of each was thus independent.20 The similarities
between the various figural types and groups was explained by Andreae as the result of assorted
adaptations of some original work of art in an unknown medium, an original that is now
impossible to reconstruct with certainty, though he suggested that it may have been a painting by
Phyromachos.21 He argued that variations among the figural types on the sarcophagi could be
examined in order to understand better how each scene is faithful to or diverges from this

19

Andreae 1956, pp. 17-18.
Andreae 1956, pp. 74-83. The various models of production will be discussed at length in Chapter 6.
21
Andreae 1956, p. 83.
20

11

original. Larger groupings of repeated figures would therefore represent a more faithful
reproduction of this original work, groupings which were gradually split up over time. He
identified these figural types on his four main sarcophagi in particular, citing their acute
similarities as the ultimate evidence for the reconstruction of his unknown original.
Other Battle Scenes
Since the work of Hamberg and Andreae, scholars have failed to provide a
comprehensive examination of the battle sarcophagi from the Antonine period as a distinct
phenomenon. Battle scenes are discussed more broadly by Tonio Hӧlscher in his 2004 book on
The Language of Images in Roman Art. He first examined the use of pathos in Hellenistic
depictions of battles, drawing his examples from the Alexander mosaic, the Alexander
sarcophagus, the various Attalid statue groups, and the monument of Aemilius Paulus.22 Through
this examination, Hӧlscher pointed to the striking similarities between Hellenistic depictions of
battle scenes, with their depth, strong pathos, and a mixture of isolated and closely connected
images, and the writings of ‘tragic’ historiographers from the Hellenistic period. Their shared
emphasis on “graphic clarity [and] the intention to bring the events before one’s very eyes”23 was
shown to be the result of a mutual desire to present a more subjective understanding of events,
whereby the pathos of the defeated could be portrayed without diminishing the glory of the
victor. Hӧlscher then traced how Classical and Hellenistic styles were combined in Roman
depictions of battles, starting from painted panels carried at triumphs, as described in literary
sources, to imperial works such as the Great Trajanic Frieze.24 Roman reliefs tended to combine
the Classical tendency towards individual fighting pairs with the Hellenistic use of dense

22

Hӧlscher 2004, pp. 23-37.
Hӧlscher 2004, p. 32.
24
Hӧlscher 2004, pp. 38-46.
23

12

compositions, which suggest great depth while at the same time showing explicitly the pathos of
the enemy, in order to create scenes that allow the viewer to experience both pity for the defeated
and awe for the victor. Hӧlscher pointed to the Roman concept of labor as one of the main
driving forces behind the display of true struggle in battle scenes.
In a 2003 article, Hӧlscher elaborated on the relationship between these depictions of war
and contemporary Roman society.25 He singled out four main aspects: the psychological impact
of war, the differentiation between the Roman and the other, the need to legitimize war, and the
memorialization of war in order to gain political power. Through the combination of Hellenistic
and Classical styles, the Romans were able to present realistic depictions of war to people who
would not have had military experience on account of the now professionalized army. This
allowed Roman commanders to perpetuate long-standing Roman ideals and further secure their
power. Pathos could be shown through Hellenistic stylistic choices, while Classical undertones
underlined the importance of the individual within the action.
Stine Birk discussed the use of sarcophagi for displaying the virtues of the deceased.26 He
examined hunting scenes at length which, despite the presence of allegorical figures, carry
interesting parallels to battle sarcophagi. Zanker and Ewald noted how the Romans often chose
to use allegories in place of historical scenes on sarcophagi, leading them to consider whether the
commander figures on sarcophagi should not be read as allegories for imperial virtue.27
In his book about Attalid statue groups, Andrew Stewart briefly discussed Roman battle
sarcophagi and their potential dependence upon these Pergamene dedications for their

25

Hӧlscher 2003, pp. 1-17.
Birk 2013, pp. 59-114.
27
Zanker and Ewald 2004, pp. 45-46.
26

13

inspiration.28 He reexamined Andreae’s interpretation of an unknown original upon which the
battle scenes were based, but rejected this idea. Stewart argued that, in the case of two similar
images, it is impossible to tell if one inspired the other, if both were inspired by a third image, or
if each developed independently.29
More recently, Stephan Faust’s book examined representations of battles on all media
during the Roman imperial period, from the time of Trajan to Septimius Severus.30 In his chapter
on battle sarcophagi, Faust recognized a tendency for the Romans to present their enemy as an
ideological type, against whom the virtues of the victorious Romans are more pronounced. He
discussed the iconography of the enemy in detail, but entirely within the context of general
artistic trends throughout this period. Others have used the battle sarcophagi in broader
discussions on the depictions of the enemy.31
Conclusion
Despite these more recent trends in sarcophagus scholarship towards discussions of
context and production, the battle sarcophagi have yet to be revisited. The works of Hamberg,
Andreae, and Hӧlscher have been widely accepted and incorporated into discussions of the social
history of the Antonine period, and no one has tried to incorporate the battle sarcophagi into
discussions of the sarcophagus industry. In this paper, I will reexamine the battle sarcophagi as a
comprehensive group. I will reconsider the various evidence for the changing styles in both
private and state arts from the time of Trajan to Septimius Severus that is reflected on these
complex and chaotic scenes of battle. Next, I will expand upon the compositional studies of
28

Stewart 2004, pp. 174-177.
Stewart 2004, pp. 170-171.
30
Faust 2012.
31
Bieńkowski (1908) and Ferris (2000) both discuss depictions of the enemy in more general terms, while Krierer
(1995) considers the physiognomies of Roman depictions of barbarians.
29

14

Andreae and reexamine his results in light of the more recent understandings of sarcophagus
trade and production. Finally, I will conclude that the Roman battle sarcophagi support Russell’s
heterogeneous model of production.

15

Chapter 3: Earlier Precedents for the Battle Sarcophagi
In this chapter, I will examine various works of art that are likely to have influenced the
style and composition of the battle sarcophagi. The most commonly cited sources for the
compositions of these battle scenes are the Alexander sarcophagus, the various monuments and
dedications of the Pergamenes, the lost art of Hellenistic and Roman paintings and painted
panels, and the sarcophagi which show Amazonomachies. Here I will add to this list grave stelai
from 4th century Athens. I will delay a discussion of the Amazon battle scenes until Chapter 7,
due to their contemporaneity with the battle sarcophagi and their close compositional parallels
that deserve greater examination.
Athenian Grave Stelai
The Dexileos grave stele from early 4th century BCE Athens features a horseman with his
right arm swinging behind him, his body turned to the viewer and his cloak billowing behind him
[fig. 1].32 His focus is directed intently downwards towards his target, a nude man who kneels
before him, his arms raised in defense. The two figures both have somber expressions and
idealized faces and bodies, as is expected for the Classical style. Their bodies twist in such a way
that emphasizes the frontality of the figures, drawing the viewer in to watch the action and at the
same time distancing the viewer as a mere spectator of that action rather than a participant: this is
not a realistic representation of a battle, but a theatrical performance of Greek victory. Though
the bodies of the men and horse are intertwined, their limbs overlapping to create the idea of
depth, the two men are positioned awkwardly in relation to one another, in reality functioning on
the same plane while conceptually facing off. With his eyes closed, the defeated figure does not

32

Eliopoulos 2009, pp. 22-23, fig. 16, with full bibliography.

16

meet the gaze of his adversary. This stele represents a Greek tendency to depict battles as oneon-one conflicts. The deceased is shown as the conqueror who is at once actively involved in the
fighting and removed from the drama of the surrounding death.
This figure is seen in various forms throughout ancient art. As discussed below, it was
borrowed and adapted by the Romans for the Great Trajanic Frieze. Another frequent use of this
figural type was for the depiction of hunting scenes. On a round Hadrianic panel on the Arch of
Constantine, Hadrian is shown pursuing an animal [fig. 2].33 His body twists so that his torso
faces the viewer, and his right arm is raised in triumph as his cloak billows back. He stands out
from the scene, the clear focal point of the action. This theme is copied on hunting scenes on
sarcophagi of this period.34 Whether a boar hunt or lion hunt, the central figure almost always
stands out from the surrounding action, framed by his companions and hunting dogs. He twists
his body to be frontal to the viewer and raises his spear to strike. This is not a representation of a
real hunt, but a dramatic representation of the central figure’s victory over his wild prey.
Alexander Sarcophagus
Found in the Royal Necropolis of Sidon, the so-called Alexander Sarcophagus probably
held the burial of a king from the mid to late 4th century BCE [fig. 3].35 All four sides of the
sarcophagus are sculpted, with one long side and one short side showing hunting scenes, and the
other two showing battles between Greeks and Persians. The long battle scene is believed to
represent the battle in 333 BCE between Alexander’s men and the Achaemenid king Darius III,
known as the Battle of Issos. This was the major turning point for Alexander’s conquest of the

33

Ferris 2013, pp. 55-60, fig. 16.
For the full corpus of hunting scenes on sarcophagi, see ASR I.2.
35
For the identification of the owner as Mazaeus, satrap of Babylon, see Heckel 2006 (with most recent
bibliography); see also Johannes 1970; Pasinli 1997.
34

17

Persians. This battle scene is centered on a Greek horseman, who twists and raises his sword to
strike a Persian who kneels behind him.36 Two other Greek horsemen frame the scene, each
raising his right arm to strike. The man on the far left is identified as Alexander, recognizable
because he wears the lion skin headdress of Hercules. The bottom of the scene is dominated by
the falling and dying bodies of various Persian soldiers, as well as the occasional Greek. One
Persian on the left of the scene tries to defend himself from the oncoming attack of a Greek as
his horse falls headlong to the ground.37 A fighting pair to the right of the central horseman
features a Persian horseman, whose right arm is raised to almost cover his face as he prepares to
strike a nude Greek who stands to face him, stretching to fill the full height of the scene [fig.
3a].38 The two figures almost directly face one another, creating a realistic representation of their
actual special relationship. The sarcophagus is notable for the use of extremely high relief, which
allowed the sculptor to create a greater sense of three-dimensionality, almost as if the scene were
composed of separate statues, joined to create a cohesive frieze. This effect is further aided by
the way the various figures twist through the space. While many stand frontal to the viewer, the
few who turn towards the back or side of the scene invite the viewer to become an active part of
the action that is occurring. This use of deep relief and twisting bodies to create a more threedimensional conception of space is similarly prominent on the battle sarcophagi.
The Altar of Zeus at Pergamon
This interest in drama which will play such a large role in the battle sarcophagus scenes is
featured prominently on the Altar of Zeus at Pergamon.39 This 2nd century BCE altar is decorated

36

Pasinli 1997, pp. 14-15.
Pasinli 1997, p. 18.
38
Pasinli 1997, pp. 22, 24.
39
For a discussion on the altar’s date, reconstruction, and function, see Stewart 2000, pp. 32-57. See also Prignitz
2008, with most complete bibliography.
37

18

with a frieze depicting the gigantomachy. The altar, now housed in Berlin, is carved in extremely
deep relief. The entire frieze features various gods and giants, and a great deal of scholarship has
been devoted to identifying and naming these figures. For the battle sarcophagi, the frieze is
significant as a model for the representation of a dramatic battle. In the scene showing Athena
battling a giant, usually identified as Alcyoneus, the goddess grasps the wild hair of the giant
kneeling before her [fig. 4].40 The giant reaches up, trying to push Athena’s hand away. His head
is bent back awkwardly by her grasp. The giant’s fate is etched on his face: his deep-set eyes turn
upwards and his mouth falls agape, clearly indicating his inevitable suffering.41 A similar scene
shows one of the Moirai grasping the hair of a giant with snaky legs [fig. 5].42 As the goddess
raises her right arm to strike her foe, her eyes lock with his. The giant tries to push her away, and
while the goddess’ face shows her calm determination, the giant’s eyes are wide and his mouth is
open, showing his wild and unrestrained fear. This scene is repeated throughout the altar and will
be extremely common on the battle sarcophagi, to be discussed below. Similarly repeated is the
juxtaposition between the control shown by the deities and the barbaric loss of control shown by
the giants, as well as a tendency for the figures to be frontal, rendering the confusion of the battle
as almost two-dimensional. The figures do not twist and turn throughout the space, but instead
function on a single plane. The effect is to glorify the victory of the gods and goddesses while
underlining the defeat of the giants. Though the action is implicit, the outcome is made explicit.
Everything on the frieze occurs along a single ground line, with the giants often occupying the
lower half of the space and the gods and goddesses standing over their victims. This is clear on

40

Schmidt 1962, pl. 10. A similar composition can be found on the scene showing Zeus, in Schmidt 1962, pl. 8. See
also Pollitt 1986, pp. 97-110.
41
For a detail of his face, see Schmidt 1962, pl. 52.
42
Schmidt 1962, pl. 35.

19

the east frieze panel showing Leto and Apollo fighting Tityos and Ephialtes, respectively [fig.
6].43 The victorious deities stand tall over the collapsing bodies of their defeated opponents.
This frontality and division of space has its exceptions, as seen on a panel on the south
frieze which shows Artemis and Hecate each fighting a giant [fig. 7].44 Artemis strides to the left
towards her opponent, her left leg crossing before her right and her body twisting. Her giant
opponent, usually identified at Otos, maintains a similar stance. He strides to the right, his right
leg crossing before his left, and his chest turned towards Artemis. This scene abandons the rigid
frontal poses found elsewhere on the altar in favor of creating this intimate face-to-face moment
in the battle. The motion of the figures is not implied but is instead explicitly shown. To the left
of this pair, Hecate raises her weapon against Klyteios. Hecate stands to the right of her
opponent, but she stands with her back towards the viewer, her right arm raised high to strike.
Her head, which faces left towards her opponent, anticipates her movement, as does her left foot
which barely touches the ground. This is not a simple attack, but a powerful one, for which the
goddess will use the full force of her body weight as she untwists and lunges towards her enemy.
These two pairs of figures abandon frontal poses in favor of a more active scene. Their combats
are not decided, but instead unfold before the eyes of the viewer, allowing the viewer to fill in
the missing parts and to anticipate the outcome. The sculptor here shows a single moment of the
battle, rendering the outcome subordinate to the action. This focus on action is also a key feature
on the battle sarcophagi.
Dedications by Attalid Kings

43
44

Schmidt 1962, pls. 13-14.
Schmidt 1962, pl. 15.

20

Other sculptures depicting battle and its aftermath are believed to have been set up by the
Attalids in commemoration of their victories against the Galatians.45 The Lesser Attalid Group,
perhaps erected at the foot of the Akropolis in Athens, featured the dead and dying enemies from
four famous Greek battles: Giants, Amazons, Persians, and Galatians [fig. 8].46 Individual figures
from the group survive as Roman copies. Each is in a different pose, either lying sprawled upon
the ground, collapsing to one side, or struggling to continue the fight. With wild hair and
dramatic expressions, the entire group can be categorized by unrestrained, barbaric emotion. No
statues of victors have been found that may belong to this group, suggesting that the goal of the
statues was to put the viewer in the place of the victor. By walking among these various statues,
the viewer would feel as though they were walking through the battlefield, looking down upon
the falling enemy, and thus gaining a better appreciation for the glory of a victory over such
brave and noble foes.47
Other statues erected by the Attalids include various representations of Galatians. The
most famous of these is the Dying Gaul, a figure which shows a Galatian trumpeter sitting upon
the ground and collapsing over to his right side [fig. 9].48 His expression is downcast and
somber, and blood can be seen spurting from a wound on his chest. Other Galatian
representations include the Venice Falling Gaul,49 the Kneeling Gaul,50 the Dead Gaul,51 and the

45

For the dating of these statues to the 2nd century BCE, see Stewart 2000, pp. 32-57.
Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Napoli inv. 6012-6014. Pollitt 1986, pp. 90-97, figs. 89-94; Cain and Rieckhoff
2002, pp. 189-192, cat. 152-154 (with full bibliography); Stewart 2004, pp. 1-10, fig. 1.
47
See the discussion in Pollitt 1986, pp. 92-95.
48
A Roman copy of a Greek original, dated to ca. 230-200 BCE. It is now held in the Capitoline Museum in Rome
(inv. 747). See image in Cain and Rieckhoff 2002, pp. 182-184, Cat. 145 (with full bibliography); Stewart 2004, p.
14, fig. 28.
49
Venice Museo Archeologico inv. 55; Müller 2002, pp. 184-188, cat. 149 (with full bibliography); Stewart 2004, p.
2, fig. 2; p. 7, fig. 17; pp. 41-43, figs. 53-56.
50
Venice Museo Archeologico inv. 57; Müller 2002, pp. 184-186, cat. 147 (with full bibliography); Stewart 2004, p.
2, fig. 2; p. 7, fig. 16; pp. 37-39, figs. 49-52.
51
Venice Museo Archeologico inv. 56; Müller 2002, pp. 184-185, cat. 146 (with full bibliography); Stewart 2004, p.
2, fig. 2; p. 6, fig. 12; p. 9, fig. 20; pp. 44-46, figs. 57-60.
46

21

Ludovisi Gaul, who, having killed his wife, turns the sword on himself [figs. 10-13].52 All of
these statues are characterized by wild hair and mustaches, typical features of a Galatian. Many
wear torques around their necks, but the Kneeling Gaul wears a tunic, loosely tied on his right
hip, and the Ludovisi Gaul wears a cape. Each has his mouth open, and the Kneeling, Falling,
and Ludovisi Gauls all look up with wide eyes. Other statue types may be added to this group,
including two equestrian statues of Amazons: the Amazon who falls from her horse [fig. 14]53
and the Amazon fighting a Gaul [fig. 15].54 The bodies of these figures twist through space,
requiring the viewer to circle the sculpture in order to take in every angle. By playing with the
poses of the Galatians and the various angles of the bodies, the sculptor creates an interactive
sculpture that is more true to actual human movements. These bodies show the tension of the
muscles as they fall and strain to continue fighting, but their limbs flail in every direction, further
emphasizing their lack of restraint. The Ludovisi Gaul, who stands in a strong and determined
manner as he plunges his own sword into his chest, is an exception to this pattern. He shows a
great deal of restraint and power, which stands in contrast with the wildness of his hair and his
desperate action. Because of the way this figure twists through space, it is impossible to fully
appreciate his bold stance and tragic circumstance without viewing him from every angle.
The figural types of the various Attalid statues of Galatians were frequently copied by the
Romans. These Roman copies have been studied by Andrew Stewart, who dates them
stylistically to the early 2nd century CE.55 Stewart cited the uniqueness of these statuary types as

52

A Roman copy of a Greek original, dated to ca. 230-200 BCE. Palazzo Altemps inv. 8608, pp. 236-239. Cain and
Rieckhoff 2002, pp. 181-183, cat. 144 (with full bibliography); Stewart 2004, p. 15, fig. 27.
53
Farnese Collection inv. 6405; Stewart 2004, p. 61, fig. 82.
54
Museo Nazionale Romano inv. 124678; Stewart 2004, p. 67, fig. 85. There are other statues as well that are
worthy of recognition, including other dying Persians and Gauls. For a more comprehensive examination of this
entire group of statues, as well as their influence of Roman and Renaissance art, see Stewart 2004. This statue will
be discussed at length below.
55
Stewart 2004, pp. 136-137.

22

evidence that they must have been imperial commissions, a point that is supported by the lack of
private dedications made during the reigns of Trajan and Hadrian.56 Because the statues are not
weathered, Stewart argued that they must have been displayed indoors, while their threedimensionality suggests that they were freestanding and not placed within niches. Stewart
proposed that the statues may have been held in either a portico or bath built by Hadrian in the
Campus Martius. Regardless of the where exactly these statues were displayed, they were clearly
public works that would have been readily viewable by the Roman people. Owing to their
distinct similarities to the Roman battle sarcophagi, these copies of Attalid statues were probably
the inspiration for the figures found on the battle sarcophagi, as discussed below.
In addition to intentionally imitating the figures from these sculptures, the battle
sarcophagi effectively capture the essence of these depictions. The Attalid statues of Galatians
are certainly realistic representations of a fearsome enemy, but they are also pieces that
encourage the active engagement of the viewer, who can only truly appreciate the statutes by
examining them from all angles, looking down onto the face of the falling men and Amazons,
and assuming the role of the victor. As we will see, the battle sarcophagi foster this same level of
participation from the viewer. Though the medium is relief rather than a free-standing statue, the
figures move as though the space were three-dimensional. Unlike on the Altar of Zeus at
Pergamon, where the figures move wildly within the frieze, giving the idea of more complex
actions while still maintaining a forced frontality, the figures on the battle sarcophagi move into
and project out of the space, creating ringed compositions that pull the viewer in, forcing them to
become not just an observer of the chaos, but an active participant within it.

56

Stewart 2004, pp. 142-143.

23

Paintings and Painted Panels
Painting, an art form of antiquity that is now almost entirely lost, is often credited as the
main source of inspiration for the style of the Roman battle sarcophagi.57 One of the few
examples of Hellenistic paintings is preserved for us in a Pompeiian mosaic that is believed to
have copied a painted original. This Alexander Mosaic features the decisive battle between
Alexander the Great and King Darius III at the Battle of Issos [fig. 16].58 The mosaic features the
moment of Darius’ flight, as the inevitable victor Alexander charges forward with an expression
of calm determination. The young king sits on his horse and twists to open his chest to the
viewer, though his gaze is fixed on Darius. The scene is filled with figures, who fight, flee, and
fall to the ground. No space is left blank within the main action, although the top portion is rather
empty except for spears. The battle is divided into two distinct armies: Alexander and his men on
the left, the Persians on the right. This is the moment when the two sides first clash and at the
same time the moment when the Persians flee. What is not shown is the actual action of the
battle in the present tense, but instead the idea of the battle, of what has happened and what will
happen in future. Though the artist of this mosaic or painting plays with three-dimensionality, as
evidenced by the many horses foreshortened from the back, the figures in the front of the scene
are positioned frontally. It is clear from the movement of his horses and the surrounding men that
Darius is fleeing from Alexander, but he actually turns and reaches towards Alexander. Similar
to Athena and her giant foe on the Altar of Zeus, the two men face frontally, creating the idea of
a battle without necessarily showing the reality of their special relationship.

57

See Rodenwaldt 1921; Hamberg 1945; Andreae 1956; Beard 2007, pp. 143-186; Ferris 2009; Beckmann 2011, pp.
130-133.
58
Cohen 1997 (with full bibliography).

24

Another lost form of painting from the Roman world survives only through literary
sources. During a triumph, painted panels were carried through the city in order to illustrate for
the Roman crowds the places and peoples important to the campaign. Pliny mentions these
painted panels twice. His first mention is in reference to M. Valerius Maximus Messala, who is
said to have been the first Roman to display a tabula in Rome, upon which was depicted his
defeat of the Carthaginians in Sicily.59 There is no mention of the design of this panel or the
artist. Pliny later mentions two tabulae set up by Augustus in celebration, which depicted War
and Triumph.60 It is unclear what exactly this depiction of “war” may have been, whether it was
a painting of a battle or a personification.
Josephus, in writing about the Jewish Wars, also mentions the practice of carrying
painted panels throughout the city. He provides a more extensive description of the scenes shown
on these panels:
θαῦμα δ᾿ ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα παρεῖχεν ἡ τῶν φερομένων πηγμάτων κατασκευή· καὶ
γὰρ διὰ μέγεθος ἦν δεῖσαι τῷ βεβαίῳ τῆς φορᾶς ἀπιστήσαντα, τριώροφα γὰρ αὐτῶν
πολλὰ καὶ τετρώροφα πεποίητο, καὶ τῇ πολυτελείᾳ τῇ περὶ τὴν κατασκευὴν ἦν
ἡσθῆναι μετ᾿ ἐκπλήξεως. καὶ γὰρ ὑφάσματα πολλοῖς διάχρυσα περιβέβλητο, καὶ
χρυσὸς καὶ ἐλέφας οὐκ ἀποίητος πᾶσι περιεπεπήγει. διὰ πολλῶν δὲ μιμημάτων ὁ
πόλεμος ἄλλος εἰς ἄλλα μεμερισμένος ἐναργεστάτην ὄψιν αὑτοῦ παρεῖχεν· ἦν γὰρ
ὁρᾶν χώραν μὲν εὐδαίμονα δῃουμένην, ὅλας δὲ φάλαγγας κτεινομένας πολεμίων,
καὶ τοὺς μὲν φεύγοντας τοὺς δ᾿ εἰς αἰχμαλωσίαν ἀγομένους, τείχη δ᾿ ὑπερβάλλοντα
μεγέθει μηχαναῖς ἐρειπόμενα καὶ φρουρίων ἁλισκομένας ὀχυρότητας καὶ πόλεων
πολυανθρώπους περιβόλους κατ᾿ ἄκρας ἐχομένους, καὶ στρατιὰν ἔνδον τειχῶν
εἰσχεομένην, καὶ πάντα φόνου πλήθοντα τόπον, καὶ τῶν ἀδυνάτων χεῖρας ἀνταίρειν
ἱκεσίας, πῦρ τε ἐνιέμενον ἱεροῖς καὶ κατασκαφὰς οἴκων ἐπὶ τοῖς δεσπόταις, καὶ μετὰ
59

Pliny NH 35.7: dignatio autem praecipua Romae increvit, ut existimo, a M'. Valerio Maximo Messala, qui
princeps tabulam [picturam] proelii, quo Carthaginienses et Hieronem in Sicilia vicerat, proposuit in latere curiae
Hostiliae anno ab urbe condita CCCCXC.
“But, as I believe, the particular esteem of painting at Rome grew thanks to M. Valerius Maximus Messala, who, in
the year of the city 490, first displayed a tabula upon the side of the Curia Hostilia, where he had defeated the
Carthaginians and Hieron in Sicily” (translated by the author).
60
Pliny NH 35.10: super omnes divus Augustus in foro suo celeberrima in parte posuit tabulas duas, quae Belli
faciem pictam habent et Triumphum, item Castores ac Victoriam.
“Above all others, Divus Augustus placed two tabulae in the most celebrated part of his forum, which had a painted
depiction of War and Triumph, also one showing Castor and Pollux and Victory” (translated by the author).

25

πολλὴν ἐρημίαν καὶ κατήφειαν ποταμοὺς ῥέοντας οὐκ ἐπὶ γῆν γεωργουμένην, οὐδὲ
ποτὸν3 ἀνθρώποις ἢ βοσκήμασιν ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς ἔτι πανταχόθεν φλεγομένης· ταῦτα
γὰρ Ἰουδαῖοι πεισομένους αὑτοὺς τῷ πολέμῳ παρέδοσαν. ἡ τέχνη δὲ καὶ τῶν
κατασκευασμάτων ἡ μεγαλουργία τοῖς οὐκ ἰδοῦσι γινόμενα τότ᾿ ἐδείκνυεν ὡς
παροῦσι. Josephus Jewish Wars 7.5
But nothing in the procession excited so much astonishment as the structure of the
moving stages; indeed, their massiveness afforded ground for alarm and misgiving
as to their stability, many of them being three or four stories high, while the
magnificence of the fabric was a source at once of delight and amazement. For
many were enveloped in tapestries interwoven with gold, and all had a framework
of gold and wrought ivory. The war was shown by numerous representations, in
separate sections, affording a very vivid picture of its episodes. Here was to be seen
a prosperous country devastated, there whole battalions of the enemy slaughtered;
here a party in flight, there others led into captivity; walls of surpassing compass
demolished by engines, strong fortresses overpowered, cities with well-manned
defenses completely mastered and an army pouring within the ramparts, an area all
deluged with blood, the hands of those incapable of resistance raised in
supplication, temples set on fire, houses pulled down over their owners’ heads, and,
after general desolation and woe, rivers flowing, not over a cultivated land, nor
supplying drink to man and beast, but across a country still on every side in flames.
For to such sufferings were the Jews destined when they plunged into the war; and
the art and magnificent workmanship of these structures now portrayed the
incidents to those who had not witnessed them, as though they were happening
before their eyes.61
This description brings forth two important considerations. The first is that these “’painted panels”
clearly showed actual battles. Josephus describes the devastation of cities and countrysides alike,
the deaths of countless enemies, and the siege of cities. His description of battalions being
slaughtered and the enemy fleeing from the battle has interesting parallels with many of the
depictions seen on the battle sarcophagi. But he also stresses that these scenes show more than just
men fighting in battle; they show constructions of forts and city walls, as well as rivers and lands
that would have been completely unknown to the average Roman. Thus the panels served a double
purpose, showing to the people what the soldiers had endured and the exotic lands to which they
had travelled.

61

Translation by H. Thackeray 1928.

26

These descriptions of triumphal “paintings” do not explain how the battles were depicted. It
is therefore difficult to claim, as many scholars have done, that the lost art of Hellenistic and
Roman painting was the inspiration for the battle sarcophagi.62 Indeed the focus of these paintings,
and the trends seen on all other wall paintings from the Roman period,63 seems to have been upon
the representation of landscapes, something that is entirely lacking from the battle sarcophagi.64
There is also an issue of switching between media, as painting cannot be directly translated onto a
relief.
More recently, this passage by Josephus has been reexamined. Ida Ӧstenberg presented an
alternative interpretation for these triumphal displays, arguing that rather than painted panels, these
were stages that held either actors or statues.65 Ӧstenberg based her interpretation on the
observation that the tabulae mentioned by various sources are only ever described as being set up
alongside famous buildings.66 Such paintings would have been complex, requiring the viewer to
linger for a while upon the image being presented, something that would have been unachievable
were they carried in a triumphal procession. Additionally, the two-dimensional nature of a painted
panel would not have been practical during a procession, with spectators on all sides.67 In his
description, Josephus describes these displays as separate scenes of various events, presented in an
easily comprehended manner and presented upon stages. Ӧstenberg interpreted this as evidence
that these stages must have held either actors, reenacting particular moments of battle, or statues
positioned as though in battle. She also noted that Josephus’ description of such scenes focused on

62

Rodenwaldt 1921; Hamberg 1945; Andreae 1956; Beard 2007, pp. 143-186; Ferris 2009; Beckmann 2011, pp.
130-133.
63
Picard 1968; Ling 1991.
64
Hamberg (1945, p. 175) also questioned the assumption that Hellenistic painting inspired these scenes.
65
Ӧstenberg 2009, pp. 245-261.
66
Ӧstenberg 2009, pp. 192-199.
67
Ӧstenberg 2009, p. 245.

27

the enemy and the disastrous consequences of war rather than on the triumphal Romans.68 If her
interpretation of Josephus is correct, and these triumphal displays featured statues, then they may
have taken a form similar to the statues of the Attalid dedications, which focused on the conquered
in order to position the viewer in the place of the victor.
Conclusion
Through this examination of various art forms from the Hellenistic and Roman periods, a
number of trends come forward that may have directly impacted the compositions of the Roman
battle sarcophagi. The depiction of the deceased upon horseback with his cloak billowing behind
him as he prepares to strike is a trope that dates back to the Classical period, and was continued
through various artistic forms, most predominately in hunting scenes. The art of the Pergamenes
was dominated by dramatic emotion on the faces of the enemy and a strong sense of threedimensionality, which required the viewer to become an active part of the composition. The
various figural types discussed among these Attalid dedications and upon the Altar of Zeus and
Alexander Sarcophagus will be shown in Chapter 5 to be direct models for the various figural
types on the battle sarcophagi. Finally, the limited evidence of Roman painting that we have
available suggests that this artistic form was dominated by landscapes, a feature which is
completely absent on the battle sarcophagi. It is therefore difficult to consider these paintings to
be the direct inspiration for the battle scenes. If Ida Ӧstenberg is correct to reconstruct the
triumphal displays as stages carrying statues, then this may strengthen the connection between the
Attalid statues and the battles depicted on sarcophagi.

68

Ӧstenberg 2009, pp. 255-256.

28

Chapter 4: Imperial Reliefs from Trajan to Septimius Severus
Gerhart Rodenwaldt was the first to recognize that the evolution of various motifs and
stylistic trends found in imperial art of the late Antonine period is represented on the battle
sarcophagi from the same period.69 In this chapter, I will consider the battle scenes depicted on
four imperial monuments: the Column of Trajan, the Great Trajanic Frieze, the Column of
Marcus Aurelius, and the Arch of Septimius Severus. In particular, I will consider the evolution
of the depiction of battles on these imperial monuments in order to better understand these
representational trends as they appear on the battle sarcophagi.
Column of Trajan
The Column of Trajan was built after Trajan’s victory in the Dacian Wars and dedicated
in 113 CE.70 Revolutionary for its conceptual treatment of space, which combined lateral and
bird’s-eye views, the 30 meter high column is decorated with a spiraling frieze. Depicted on this
frieze is a wide array of scenes from the two Dacian wars that were fought between 101-106 CE.
The narrative scenes are continuous, with different episodes separated by trees or the changing
direction of the figures. Battles scenes are relatively rare on the column, with the majority of
scenes showing everyday activities such as camp construction, imperial addresses, marches, and
public sacrifices. Trajan appears 59 times in the frieze, but never in a battle. As noted by Fabio
Coarelli, this is both a realistic representation of the emperor’s role on a campaign, as well as a
symbolic representation of the might of the emperor as the driving force behind the operation,

69

Rodenwaldt 1935. His understanding is discussed by Martin Beckmann (2011, pp. 12-14).
See Cichorius 1927; Rossi 1971; Brilliant 1984, pp. 90-123; Lepper and Frere 1988; Coarelli 2000, Faust 2012,
pp. 9-91 (with the most complete bibliography).
70

29

who is both calm and contemplative despite the surrounding disorder.71 The war is won not by
brute force, but through Trajan’s superior technical and bureaucratic abilities.
There are distinct trends in the depiction of battle scenes on the Column of Trajan,
including a strong division of space between the two opposing sides and the use of multiple
ground lines. In scenes XXIV-XXV, Roman soldiers, some on horseback and others on foot, are
shown with their right arms raised, presumably holding spears [fig. 17].72 These Romans cluster
in a group on the left side of the scene, charging right as a single mass. From the right of the
scene, the Dacians charge towards the oncoming enemy with their swords similarly raised. These
men gather into three separate groups, all on a lower ground level than their Roman opponents.
Because the narrative on the column as a whole moves up and towards the right, the Romans are
clearly in such a position that they will simply roll over the Dacians. The bodies of dead and
dying Dacians lie at the bottom of the scene. As this battle scene proceeds, we see the last of the
barbarian troops, where the dead and injured are being dragged away. The scene then shifts, with
Trajan and two of his officers standing up high, overlooking the destruction of a Dacian village
to his right with his back turned on the violent battle.
A later battle, on scenes XXXVII-XXXIX, shows a surprise attack conducted by the
Romans at night [fig. 18].73 As before, dead and wounded Dacians are shown at the forefront of
the scene. Behind them, the battle rages on. Unlike the previous battle scene, the Dacians largely
occupy the left and upper parts of this scene, but the two sides still clash as large blocks of
figures, with the wall of barbarians struggling to fight off the wall of Romans. Immediately to the
right of this scene, the barbarians are shown surrendering. Though only the Dacians were shown

71

Coarelli 2000, p. 27.
Coarelli 2000, pp. 67-68, pls. 23-24.
73
Coarelli 2000, pp. 83-84, pls. 39-40.
72

30

injured in the actual battle, the next scene on the frieze, scene XL, depicts Roman soldiers caring
for their wounded.74 Trajan stands to the left with his back turned towards the wounded Romans.
In the next battle, scenes XL-XLIII, the Dacians again occupy the upper part of the scene.75 They
are all clustered into a group, and each man holds his right arm raised in an identical pose. The
Roman troops, with their backs turned towards the viewer, surround the barbarians. Fallen
Dacian bodies lie between their feet. To the right, many Dacians flee the battle, only to be
massacred in the woods. Once again, the depiction of battle is followed by the figure of Trajan,
who addresses his troops, his back turned towards the action. These depictions of battles
emphasize a strong division of space between the two opposing armies, who form masses of
fighters, which turns the focus of these scenes upon the impending action, rather than actual
combat. As another example of this strong division of space, scene LXIV shows a battle in which
the Moorish cavalry on the left rides towards a mass of fleeing and dying Dacians [fig. 19].76
Though a few Dacians turn to fight, it is likely that this attack was nothing short of a massacre.
This scene is divided into the two opposing sides, with all of the Moors on the left and all of the
Dacians on the right. These two masses are completely separated from each other, but this
division does not obscure the viewer’s understanding of the outcome.
Another battle takes place just outside a Roman fortification on scenes XCIV-XCIVII.77
The Romans, who occupy the upper right of the scene, tower over the Dacians, who raise their
shields in defense and flee the battle. The fighting continues on the other side of the Roman
fortifications. Here, for the first time, Trajan is shown leading a cavalry charge towards the
battle. Trajan stands out from the scene, as no other figures stand directly next to him and his
74

Coarelli pp. 85-86, pls. 41-42.
Coarelli 2000, pp. 88-90, pls. 44-46.
76
See Coarelli 2000, pp. 111-112, pls. 67-68.
77
Coarelli 2000, pp. 157-160, pls. 113-116.
75

31

figure projects more from the scene than those around him. Adding more emphasis to his
significance, he is scaled larger than his horse and practically floats off its back, sitting in what
would in reality be an impossible position. He raises his right arm before him, as though
signaling to his troops, while his cloak billows out slightly behind him. With his profile view,
Trajan’s pose on his horse is almost identical to how he is shown in the various adlocutio scenes.
Although he is leading the charge, he is not part of the actual battle, just as in the previous scenes
when he has his back turned to the action. The emperor is removed from any of the real violence.
Perhaps the most dramatic battle scene is found farther along the column in scene CXII
[fig. 20].78 Various barbarian bodies and disjointed limbs line the bottom of this scene, and at
least three distinct pairs of fighters are visible. In all three instances, a barbarian sits or kneels on
the ground and raises his arms in a last, desperate attempt to fight away his Roman assailant,
who raises a sword to strike. On the right of the scene, the Roman soldier already brings his
sword down upon the barbarian, plunging it into his head. The barbarian reaches up to push away
the sword, looking at his foe. This pairing of a standing Roman striking a kneeling barbarian is
frequently repeated on the battle sarcophagi, as discussed below. Another interesting figure is a
soldier whose identity as a Roman or barbarian is difficult to discern. With his back turned to the
viewer, this undeclared soldier raises his sword above his head and twists into the background of
the scene. Another barbarian figure faces this man in a similar fashion. The pose of the turning
man matches that of the Ludovisi Gaul [fig. 13] and is another recurring figural type on the battle
sarcophagi. Unlike the other battle scenes on the column, this scene focuses on the actual action
of war by showing these fighting pairs. Though most of the figures are posed to show their
moment of greatest potential for action, the Roman who does strike his foe shows the real action,

78

Coarelli 2000, p. 180, pl. 36.

32

which is further underlined by the presence of the dead bodies lying upon the ground. A one-onone combat is also shown in one other battle scene, scene LXVI. The Roman and Dacian troops
advance toward each other, just about to meet in battle; however, one Roman and one Dacian
soldier have broken from their respective masses of troops to face off in single combat. The two
men both twist to emphasize their preparedness to strike, but the resulting composition creates an
unrealistic spatial relationship between the two men.79
The battle scenes on the Column of Trajan are rendered in such a way to show the
clashing of two distinct armies, one good and one bad. The outcomes of these battles are always
clear, as only one side is ever shown to be suffering. There are a few exceptions to this rule, such
as the scene which shows Roman soldiers tending to their wounded, or the few instances where
individual Roman and barbarian soldiers have broken off from the main action to fight one-onone. The general trend, however, is to show the moments just before the actual clash of the
armies, or the moment immediately after the battle, as the enemy begins to flee. The artists of
this frieze had begun experimenting with the use of multiple ground lines, allowing many more
figures to be shown within the battle scene than if only one ground line were used. Though
barbarians are often on the lower ground, signaling their inferiority to the Roman soldiers, it is
notable when individual barbarians sometimes break this division. There is the occasional
tendency to experiment with the mixing of figures to represent better an actual moment of action
within the battle, but this tendency is limited and overshadowed by the strong division of space
throughout. Along with this division of space, the moment of greatest potential between the two
armies is underlined by the body positioning of many of the figures. Rather than showing two
fighters actually striking one another, they are shown with their weapons raised and prepared to

79

Coarelli 2000, p. 117, pl. 73.

33

strike, held at the climax of their swing. These battles are carefully organized to show the
potential of action rather than the action itself.80
One major innovation in the column’s depiction of war is its willingness to show the
more gruesome aspects of battle. Many scenes show Roman soldiers proudly presenting the
severed heads of their victims to the emperor, as seen on scene LXXI [fig. 21].81 The bodies of
dead Dacians are shown piled up, some of them completely broken and contorted.82 There is
even a depiction on scenes CXX-CXXI in which the Dacians poison themselves rather than
allowing themselves to be captured.83 They are shown collapsing and dying, holding the bodies
of their loved ones and comforting each other in their final moments. These scenes boldly
present the true horror that accompanies war; however, the Romans are almost never directly
involved in these dramatic moments. It is clear that they are the cause of the Dacians’ sufferings,
but the Romans are not shown as sharers in that suffering. This is further emphasized by Trajan’s
role within these scenes. Only once is Trajan shown actively involved in a battle, leading a
cavalry charge. In this instance, the Romans approach the enemy, though they are not yet
actively fighting. In all other battles, the emperor stands in the following frame, his back turned
to the dramatic action, as he addresses the troops or receives captives. Every time Trajan appears,
his figure dominates the scene and overshadows the surrounding figures. Not only is the emperor
separated from the action of the battle scenes, but he is also separated from the scenes in which
he is shown. He is a stock figure for the representation of imperial values, glorified by the
submission of his conquered foes and the praise of his troops.

80

It can also be argued that this division of space between the two armies may have aided in the visibility and
readability of these scenes, as the viewer would look up at them from such a great distance.
81
Coarelli 2000, p. 125, pl. 81.
82
On various scenes, including scenes XCIV-XCVII, Coarelli 2000, pp. 157-159, pls. 113-115.
83
Coarelli 2000, pp. 191-192, pls. 147-148.

34

The stylistic and compositional trends on the Column of Trajan are a prelude to the trends
on the battle sarcophagi. Although the column mostly features strongly divided scenes, the
occasional use of one-on-one combats to further dramatize the action is the beginning of a trend
that will be heavily utilized on the sarcophagus battle scenes. Likewise, the column’s
presentation of the more gruesome aspects of war is a main feature on the sarcophagi, but while
the Roman soldiers are not part of this dramatic action on the column, they will be fully
integrated into the action on the battle sarcophagi.
Great Trajanic Frieze
The trend of depicting the emperor within the context of war and at the same time
removed from the action of battle can be seen on the Great Trajanic Frieze, a series of panels
repurposed for the Arch of Constantine [fig. 22].84 Trajan appears twice on this frieze. On the far
left, he is shown in an adlocutio scene, standing out from those who surround him as he
addresses a crowd. This is identical to the many representations of Trajan on his column. Trajan
is also shown on the right of the frieze, engaged in a battle. In this scene, his horse leaps to the
right, surrounded by his triumphant men who raise standards and play trumpets. In his wake,
Roman soldiers loom over their enemy, striking down the already broken bodies of Dacians. The
tone is clearly that of Roman victory, emphasized by the placement of the Roman soldiers above
their enemy. The purpose of this scene is not to show the chaos of battle, but rather to show the
victory of the Romans, with Trajan as a personification of imperial virtue. The battle continues
before him and is rather blocky: the Dacians are grouped to the right, fleeing before the

84

Touati 1987; Faust 2012, pp. 9-29 (with the most complete bibliography).

35

oncoming wall of Romans that approaches from the left. This is the moment before the two
armies clash, or perhaps the moment after they clashed and the enemy now flees.
The image of Trajan on this relief is reminiscent of the Dexileos stele. His horse leaps to
the right, and he raises his right arm behind himself, causing his torso to turn towards the viewer.
As a result of his twisting action and his forward motion, Trajan’s cloak billows dramatically
behind him, effectively framing his figure. Trajan stands out from the scene, his body and that of
his horse completely unobscured. At the same time, he is of the same scale as the surrounding
figures, and his gaze is directed slightly downwards towards the barbarian who kneels before
him, begging for clemency. Unfortunately, the right arm of the emperor is missing, making it
impossible to know what he held, but the angle of his arm and his focused stare suggest that he
was holding a sword, ready to strike. This representation of Trajan is therefore twofold. His
physical separation from the enemy and from his own men, as well as his frontal torso and
billowing cloak, elevate Trajan to the status of a hero, something beyond a mere mortal man. He
personifies what it is to be an excellent commander and emperor. On the other hand, Trajan is
engaged in the battle. Unlike on the Column of Trajan, this figure of the emperor is raising a
weapon, his eyes locked onto a target. He acknowledges the chaotic battle that rages before him
and plays an active role within it. These different modes of representing the emperor suggest that
there were two different understandings of the emperor’s role in war. Whereas the Trajan on the
column won his war through careful planning and speeches, the Trajan on the Great Trajanic
Frieze won the war by actively leading his troops and taking a personal role in the action of the
battle. The depiction of the emperor on the Column of Trajan is probably more realistic, as it is
unlikely he actually fought in any of the battles. By showing the emperor in the midst of battle of
the Great Trajanic Frieze, his role within the war is allegorized and elevated beyond the bounds
36

of historical accuracy. This trend of representing the emperor as an active part of the battle is
translated onto the commanding figures on the battle sarcophagi. These figures are at once
removed from the action and actively engaged with the battle.
Column of Marcus Aurelius
The Column of Marcus Aurelius was constructed either around 176 CE, after the
emperor’s triumph over the German and Sarmatian tribes, or in 180 CE, as a funerary
dedication.85 As with the Column of Trajan, the Column of Marcus Aurelius has a continuous
frieze, with the various scenes divided by natural elements and shifts in the directions of the
figures. The frieze has been badly damaged over time due to its long exposure to the elements.
The figures are deeply carved, creating a greater contrast between light and shadow than was
achieved on the Column of Trajan, while many of the figures’ heads are enlarged to allow for an
easier display of emotion. Similar to the Column of Trajan, Marcus Aurelius appears throughout
the frieze, usually in an adlocutio scene, and other commonly occurring scenes include marches
and construction projects. There are thirty battle scenes on the Column of Marcus Aurelius,
making them the most frequent type of scene on the frieze.86
As on the Column of Trajan, many of the battle scenes on the Column of Marcus
Aurelius show battles as the clash between two distinct armies, two solid masses that face off, as
discussed at length by Martin Beckmann.87 Such scenes do not show the height of battle, but

85

Griebel 2013 (with the most complete bibliography). See also Hanfmann 1964, p. 115; Brilliant 1984, pp. 90-123;
Coarelli 2008; Kleiner 2010, pp. 199-201; Beckmann 2011; Faust 2012, pp. 92-120. Our lack of literary evidence
surrounding the construction of the column makes dating it quite difficult, though attempts have been made to date it
on the basis of the events represented on its frieze; in particular, see the extensive discussion in Beckmann 2011, pp.
19-36.
86
See Iain Ferris’ discussion of the violent depictions on the column (Ferris 2000, pp. 131-150) and the depictions
of violence against women (Ferris 2000, pp. 111-130).
87
Beckmann 2011, pp. 167-176.

37

rather a battle that is about to begin, the exact moment when the two armies meet. On scene XIX,
Roman soldiers cluster in a linear rank at the top of the scene, preparing to thrust their spears into
the barbarians before them.88 It is clear that a battle is about to begin, a moment in time a viewer
understands without seeing the true chaos of a battle.
Other battles, such as on scene XCII, show the two sides not as ranks but as masses of
bodies [fig. 23]. 89 In this particular example, the Roman cavalry clusters to the left, driving away
the wall of barbarian troops to the right. Unlike on Trajan’s Column, where such scenes
represent the moments before or immediately after the two battle lines meet, this scene depicts
various barbarians falling to the ground, as they are still under direct attack from the Romans.
One barbarian sits with his back arched and his chin raised as a Roman soldier drives a spear into
his back.
But most of the battle scenes on the Column of Marcus Aurelius go beyond this, showing
the more gruesome aspects of war. Unlike on the Column of Trajan, which stresses Roman
victory through technical skill and achievement, this frieze instead presents the real physical
efforts of the soldiers. These battle scenes are extremely innovative in their more heavily
integrated depiction of battles; instead of showing two separate masses and the moment that they
meet, these scenes separate out a few of the individual figures into one-on-one combats.
Various one-on-one combats are shown on scene LXXIX [fig. 24].90 At the bottom, a
barbarian’s dead body lies limp upon the ground, and beside him another dead barbarian is
tossed across the body of his fallen horse. Above these two, a Roman pursues a barbarian, both

88

Coarelli 2008, p. 148; Beckmann 2011, p. 169, fig. 8.7.
Coarelli 2008, pp. 297-298; Beckmann 2011, p. 170, fig. 8.8.
90
Coarelli 2008, p. 275.
89

38

on horseback. The Roman turns his back to the viewer while the barbarian turns to look at his
pursuer, with his chest turned to the viewer. This is a clear attempt to show the realistic spatial
relationship between the two men. Another barbarian falls backwards off his horse behind this
pair, and to the right a Roman soldier drives his sword into the chest of a kneeling barbarian
while pulling back his head. The barbarian reaches to the sky, begging for mercy. This pair is
particularly dramatic, as the barbarian does not fight but is simply executed. Many similar
figures and pairings are common on the battle sarcophagi, as discussed below.
On scene LXI, barbarian captives are decapitated by Roman soldiers [fig. 25].91 Two
bodies have already crumpled to the ground, their disarticulated heads positioned to face directly
out towards the audience. Two more barbarians lean over and present their necks as two Roman
soldiers raise their swords to strike. The scene is shown at the moment of greatest potential, at
the height of the sword swing, and at the very final moment of the barbarians’ lives. Even
without the beheaded bodies on the ground, it is clear what is about to happen in this scene. Yet
the sculptors chose to include the decapitated bodies, boldly showing the most gruesome aspects
of war.92
Even with these stylistic changes, many of the battle scenes on the Column of Marcus
Aurelius are still quite blocky. The two sides of the battle are kept separate, with only a couple of
soldiers from either side actually mixing in with each other, as on scenes LXIII and LXIV.93 As
on the Column of Trajan, the armies are sometimes shown at their maximum potential for
fighting, giving the illusion of action without really showing it. The viewer is shown the
initiation of the battle, as two armies meet, and the results of the battle, where bodies are piled

91

Coarelli 2008, pp. 235-237; Ferris 2009, pp. 138-139, fig. 64; Beckmann 2011, p. 149, fig. 7.10.
See also Iain Ferris’ chapter on the screaming man (Ferris 2000, pp. 97-110).
93
Coarelli 2008, pp. 239-240; Beckmann 2011, p. 172, fig. 8.10.
92

39

high. At the same time, a number of scenes show more advanced battle compositions, which
feature one-on-one combats and the actual action of battle, with swords being driven into chests
and enemy soldiers in the act of falling from their mounts. There is also a tendency towards
crowding figures into these scenes at the expense of any backgrounds.
One of the great differences between the two columns is the exaggeration of separate
ground lines on the Column of Marcus Aurelius. Whereas the Column of Trajan presents
multiple ground lines in a subtle way to fit more figures into the scene and to play with bird’seye views, this column presents a much more abstract treatment of space. The various ground
lines are completely separated from one another, as seen on scene L [fig. 26].94 While barbarians
lie upon the ground dying in this scene, Roman cavalryman seem to fly through the air above
them, preparing to strike the other barbarians who remain standing, similarly floating off of the
ground. These divided ground lines are crossed by various figures, such as the barbarian who
turns to strike a Roman cavalryman and the falling bodies behind him, which appear to drop
from the highest ground line to the lowest ground line where their allies lie. Separated ground
lines are also pronounced on scene CIX, where the bodies of dead and dying barbarians are
shown on three distinct levels, as the surrounding figures proceed with the battle as though the
separate ground lines do not exist [fig. 27].95 The multiple ground lines of the Column of Marcus
Aurelius are over-exaggerated, allowing the sculptors to play with the presentation of falling and
dying bodies in order to give the impression that these bodies are piled high throughout the
battlefields and fall continuously.96

94

Coarelli 2008, p. 214.
Coarelli 2008, p. 331.
96
Scene XXVII in Beckmann 2011, p. 147, fig. 7.8.
95

40

While the Column of Trajan maintained a separation of the two armies, the Column of
Marcus Aurelius tends to feature one-on-one combats, a trend that is even more prominent on the
battle sarcophagi. Similarly, while Trajan’s Column experimented with multiple ground lines,
the Column of Marcus Aurelius fully expands these ground lines, an over-exaggeration that will
be used on the battle sarcophagi to crowd as many figures as possible into the scene. The
Column of Marcus Aurelius shows the intensification of trends that were tested on the Column
of Trajan and which would ultimately impact the stylistic choices of the battle sarcophagi.
Arch of Septimius Severus
Built in 203 CE in the Roman Forum, the Arch of Septimius Severus served to commemorate
the emperor’s successful Parthian campaigns.97 The arch bears a series of panels that present
purely historical scenes devoid of allegorical figures, replacing them with real generals and
conquered people. The continuous narrative is presented moving not in a linear direction but
instead snaking back and forth through the space, as if to imitate the spiral friezes on the great
imperial columns on a flat surface and adding complexity to these compositions.98 At the same
time, the division of space among the various ground lines is completely arbitrary. Similar to the
over-exaggerated separation of ground lines on the Column of Marcus Aurelius, here the
multiple ground lines are separated to the extent that they form separate scenes.
On Panel III from the northwest of the arch, which is believed to show the capture of
Seleucia, there is a siege scene, and the Romans and their Parthian enemies are divided, not only
into separate masses but also by their different ground lines [fig. 28].99 Roman soldiers surround
97

Hanfmann 1964, pp. 116-117; Brilliant 1967; 1984, pp. 90-123; Lusnia 2006; Kleiner 2010, pp. 238-240, Faust
2012, pp. 121-142 (with most complete bibliography).
98
Richard Brilliant (1984, pp. 111-112) argues that the panels on the Arch of Septimius Severus are derived from
the spiraling friezes of the two imperial columns.
99
Brilliant 1967 pp. 195-207, pls. 5, 76-85.

41

the Parthian soldiers, but the two do not directly clash in battle. The scene presents the idea of
Roman soldiers surrounding the enemy’s camp, but in reality they stand below the camp,
reaching across the separated ground lines to attack. The two armies are thus divided in space
into two separate masses, as has been seen above on the two imperial columns.
The center of Panel I on the southeast side of the arch shows a skirmish between Romans and
barbarians [fig. 29].100 Unlike the siege scenes, where the Romans and their enemy are kept
apart, this battle allows for greater confusion between the two opposing sides, with individually
fighting pairs interspersed between the collapsing bodies of defeated soldiers. Multiple ground
lines are used to present a greater depth to the scene, but figures are not confined to these
designated spaces; a number of barbarian bodies crumple to the ground, crossing over the
various ground lines and falling into the unrelated scene below. Because they cross over these
divisions of space, these falling bodies are stuck in a loop of perpetual motion and seem to fall
forever. The sculptor therefore abandoned the strict divisions of space in favor of greater
confusion within the battle scene.
The panels on the Arch of Septimius Severus have taken the continuous spiral friezes from
the imperial columns, uncoiled them, and applied them to a flat panel. Instead of moving in one
consistent direction, the action on these panels snakes back and forth. This removes the
directionality and the continuous flow of action found on the friezes on the columns in favor of
more stationary action, which is read chronologically from the top to the bottom in individual
scenes. The entire story is before the viewer’s eyes, giving him snapshots into distinct episodes
of the campaign, rather than the more explicit movement through time that is portrayed by the

100

Brilliant 1967, pp. 184-188, pls. 60-65.

42

columns. The battle sarcophagi similarly present a single panel of action, presenting the viewer
with a single moment within the chaos of a battle.
Conclusion
Through these various imperial monuments, a few trends become clear in the depiction of
battle scenes. First, the separation of the emperor from the action had become the norm. Either
he is separated entirely from all battles, as shown on the Column of Trajan, never shown actually
fighting and with his back turned towards the action, which emphasizes his role in careful
tactical planning and bureaucratic decisions, or he is shown fighting, but is rendered in such a
way that raises him above the action, as an almost mythological ideal of a soldier, as seen on the
Great Trajanic Frieze. Another trend on the imperial art of this period is the over-exaggerated use
of multiple ground lines. Whereas the Column of Trajan used multiple ground lines in order to fit
more figures into the scenes, the multiple ground lines on the Column of Marcus Aurelius were
completely separated so that by the time of the Arch of Septimius Severus, the separated ground
lines created completely separate scenes. A final trend is a shift away from blocky divisions of
space between opposing armies towards the integrated one-on-one combat compositions on the
Column of Marcus Aurelius and on Panel I of the Arch of Septimius Severus, allowing for the
presentation of more chaotic battles. The Arch of Septimius Severus also represents the final
shift away from the continuous flow of narrative towards a snapshot of a single moment within a
battle. These various stylistic trends, termed the Antonine Stilwandel by Rodenwaldt, clearly
governed the compositions of the battle sarcophagi, as discussed in the next chapter.101

101

For the origins of this Stilwandel, see Jung 1984, pp. 59-104.

43

Chapter 5: Compositions and Iconography of Battle Scenes on Sarcophagi
Various groupings of figures are repeated on the battle scenes on Roman sarcophagi. As
discussed in Chapter 2, Bernard Andreae identified these repeated figures on four sarcophagi in
particular: the Ammendola (1), the Via Tiburtina (4), the Small Villa Doria Pamphili (3), and the
Small Ludovisi (5).102 His compositional analysis of the battle sarcophagi deserves further
reexamination, as he focused on only four examples and his results were based on an outdated
model of sarcophagus production.103 In order to create a more complete understanding of the
individual figures and groups depicted on these battle sarcophagi, it is necessary to conduct a
comprehensive examination of their scenes and iconography. This will allow for a better
understanding of how they reflect the changing ideology and reception of the enemy occurring
during this period, while providing a new prospective on sarcophagus production and workshops.
I will begin with the figural types that were identified by Andreae and apply them more widely
to the complete set of Roman battle sarcophagi. I will consider other repeated groupings that he
exempted from his study. I will discuss how these figural types, as well as the general stylistic
trends on these sarcophagi, were influenced by the various works of art discussed in the previous
two chapters. Through this examination of the figural types and groups on the full corpus of
Roman battle sarcophagi, I argue that prototypes for the individual figures must have existed,
rather than a single prototype for complete battle scenes. Finally, in Chapter 6, I will show how it
is possible to use the compositions of these battle sarcophagi to understand their production
better.
Two Riders Group

102
103

Andreae 1956, pp. 17-18.
These models of production are discussed in Chapter 6.

44

Andreae’s first figural type is the “Two Riders Group” (die Zweireitergruppe).104 This
group includes a Roman whose horse leaps to the right and a nude barbarian who falls from his
horse. The Roman rider wears full uniform and raises a weapon, usually a spear, in his right arm.
Though his horse leaps to the right, it turns its head back to the left, creating the illusion that the
horse is projecting out of the scene towards the viewer. The rider twists in the saddle so that he
faces left, his torso turned towards the viewer. I will refer to this figure as the Roman Horseman
[fig. 30]. This figure is found on many of the battle sarcophagi, including the Ammendola (1),
Small Via Tiburtina (4), Dallas Museum (2), Small Villa Doria Pamphili (3), Small Ludovisi (5),
Ince Blundell (11), Large Ludovisi (18), Large Campo Santo (12), Palermo (14), and Concordia
University (6) sarcophagi. The Roman Horseman is found in various places throughout these
scenes, sometimes attacking a falling barbarian, and other times attacking an unseen victim. The
falling barbarian in Andreae’s “Two Riders Group” is nude and has his back turned to the
viewer. The horse collapses to the ground with the rider, whose right arm and leg are still
wrapped around the body of the creature. I will refer to this figure as Falling Barbarian A [fig.
31].
By placing the barbarian and his horse in front of the Roman rider, who is already
twisting around, the sculptor creates a sense of depth in the scene, as though the two men are
circling around each other during the battle. The open chest of the Roman invites the viewer into
the scene, while his and his horse’s downward gazes draw the attention of the viewer down
towards the action of the falling barbarian. Similarly, the turned back of the barbarian forces the
viewer to become part of the action, while still creating a degree of separation. The nature of the
relief prevents the viewer from examining this pairing from every angle and forces the viewer to

104

Andreae 1956, pp. 19-33.

45

infer the rest of the scene. Despite his pathetic body position, the face of the barbarian is
obscured, removing the viewer from the drama of the event and the inevitable death, and instead
directing the viewer’s eye and perhaps emotions towards the heroic victor. Because the viewer
engages with the scene in this way, he is at once an active participant in the recreation of the
three-dimensional image and put into the place of the Roman solider who has conquered this
falling foe.
This pairing of the Roman Horseman and Falling Barbarian A is seen on the left of the
Ammendola (1), the Small Via Tiburtina (4), the Dallas Museum (2), and the Small Villa Doria
Pamphili (3) sarcophagi, and on the right of the Small Ludovisi sarcophagus (5). On all but the
Ammendola (1), the cloak of the Roman soldier billows out behind him. The face of the
barbarian turned up to look at his assailant can be seen on the Ammendola sarcophagus (1)
alone. The falling barbarian is also featured on the left of the Villa Borghese sarcophagus (13),
though the barbarian and his horse have already fallen to the ground, and no Roman enemy is
seen, forcing the viewer to imagine the Roman who has attacked this man. A similar pairing is
found on the left of the Concordia University sarcophagus (6). The barbarian in this example
does not fall from a horse but is freefalling in a position that closely resembles the Falling
Barbarian A figural type. His Roman assailant stands to the left and reaches over him to stab
another barbarian to the right.
Other types of falling barbarians are also shown on the sarcophagi. On the Badia di Farfa
sarcophagus (8), the central figure is a barbarian who has fallen off the side of his horse. This
figure, Falling Barbarian B [fig. 32], sits on the ground with his back to the viewer, his right leg
and left arm still reaching up towards his horse, which faces left. Because this backwards facing
figure is central to the scene, he invites the viewer’s attention into the action of the battle. The
46

viewer is encouraged to imagine the front of this figure, as well as to imagine what unseen
enemy stands behind his horse. A figure in a similar position can be seen on the far left of the
Small Campo Santo sarcophagus (7) and in the center of the Badia di Cava sarcophagus (9).
Though heavily damaged on each, it is clear that this figure faces back into the scene, his left arm
raised.
Other sarcophagi show barbarians sliding off the backs of their horses, such as the
example on the Small Ludovisi sarcophagus (5). I will call this Falling Barbarian C [fig. 33]. The
figure on the Small Ludovisi looks up with his mouth open wide in shock. He falls back onto his
right hand, raising his shield with his left arm. His legs are still raised as he is only just now
falling from his horse. The Small Ludovisi sarcophagus (5) also features a man who falls with
his arms and legs flung behind him, projecting his chest towards the ground, his body completely
broken as it falls.
Other falling barbarians are seen on the Via Tiburtina sarcophagus (4), on the center of
which two barbarians plunge headfirst to the ground. Many figures fall on the Large Villa Doria
Pamphili (17) and the Portonaccio (16) sarcophagi, tumbling from different heights and at
different angles, each body broken and contorted with pain; however, none of these falling
figures match the design of those mentioned above, as their motions are random and varied.
Bodies dying upon the ground dominate the bottom half of most of the sarcophagi. These
falling and fallen figures add to the chaos and drama of the scenes. Rather than focusing entirely
on the glorious battle that rages, the sculptors have made the conscious decision to show some of
the grisly effects of war. The scenes do not just show the final moments of life, when the victim
is still actively part of the fight, but instead show also the first moments of death, as the victim

47

slowly slips from life. These figures further fill any negative space between the legs of the other
figures.
Turning Barbarian
Another figural type identified by Andreae is the Gaul who is shown standing with his
back to the viewer, stretching across the full height of the scene, which I will call the Turning
Barbarian [fig. 34].105 He holds a shield on his left arm at his side and raises his right arm up and
over his head, his sword pointing down over his back in an exaggerated striking position,
showing the moment of greatest potential for his upcoming action. The man’s legs are spread in
a wide stance and he is nude, allowing the viewer to see the full length of his body and his tense
muscles as he stretches and twists. This figure strongly recalls the Ludovisi Gaul.
The Turning Barbarian figure plays an important role in the overall composition of a
battle scene. Similar to Falling Barbarian A and B, who fall from their horses with their backs to
the viewer, this standing barbarian draws the attention of the viewer into the action of the scene.
His turned back allows the viewer to imagine a greater depth to the scene, as this man’s unseen
foe must lie somewhere deeper within the composition; at the same time, by hiding his face, this
barbarian remains anonymous. The viewer is kept distant from the scene as a mere spectator of
the action, desiring, but unable, to walk around the statue-like figure and engage directly with the
action. His stance tends to be the most victorious of the barbarians within the scene; yet he is
faceless, his glory hidden from the viewer. He represents a worthy opponent. The turning
barbarian also gives a more accurate representation of the spatial relationship between the
opposing figures. It is far more realistic in a battle that the figures would directly face each other,

105

Andreae 1956, pp. 33-49.

48

rather than awkwardly turning their bodies to face an imaginary audience. By turning some of
the figures within the space, the sculptor realistically represents how men would face off in a real
battle, showing a greater concern for realism than for artistic convention.
This figure is featured most prominently near the center of the Ammendola (1) and the
Dallas Museum (2) sarcophagi. On these two examples, the barbarian is almost entirely
unobscured by the surrounding action and instead stands out as a central point in the scene. His
gaze appears to be directed slightly to the left, though it is difficult to tell since his face cannot be
seen. There is no specific target for his attack; instead, his attention is directed towards an unseen
victim. On the Small Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (3), a barbarian stands in this same
position, again central within the scene and unobscured by the surrounding action. His head is
turned to look up to the right, where a Roman horseman rushes towards him. Unlike on the
Ammendola (1) and Dallas Museum (2) sarcophagi, where the barbarian’s opponent is unseen,
this man has a definite target. On all three of these sarcophagi, the Turning Barbarian is part of a
group of four, which also includes a barbarian horseman, a Roman horseman, and a barbarian
who has fallen to the ground and is about to be stabbed.106 The four figures in this group, which I
will call the Dallas Museum Circle, form a circle of fighting figures [fig. 35]
The turned barbarian is repeated on the Large Ludovisi sarcophagus (18). The figure is
on the far right of the scene and is the only figure on the sarcophagus to turn his back to the
viewer. Unlike in the previous examples, this barbarian wears trousers, and his right arm is not
raised over his head, but is instead drawn back to strike. He quite clearly looks up to the left
where a Roman cavalryman bounds towards him with his spear raised. Although the positioning

106

These correspond with the Fleeing Barbarian, Central Commander C, and Cowering Barbarian discussed below.

49

of these two figures is not realistic, as the barbarian would in reality be under the Roman’s horse
rather than in front of him, the two figures successfully create the idea of depth.
On the Palermo sarcophagus (14), a barbarian stands with his back turned in the center of
the scene, his shield raised high and his right arm drawn back. A Roman soldier on horseback
hovers over him, clearly prepared to strike; the barbarian, however, does not meet his gaze,
instead seeming to look beyond this man and towards the central Roman horseman. The
commander looks back towards his barbarian, though another barbarian lies below the feet of his
horse, looking up in terror. These four figures complete a circle similar to the Dallas Museum
Circle, creating the illusion of three dimensional space. The Turning Barbarian on the Palermo
sarcophagus (14), unlike on the other sarcophagi, is a smaller figure than those who surround
him. Instead of standing out from the action, he almost disappears within it. The smaller scale of
the Turning Barbarian causes the figure to shrink away, as though his presence has no impact on
the battle, especially compared to the tunic-wearing barbarian to the right, who bravely faces off
with his opponent.
A Turning Barbarian is featured on the left of the Villa Borghese sarcophagus (13). This
barbarian is fully dressed and holds a shield, his drawn sword now missing. His head is also
missing, but his attention seems to be directed to the Roman soldier on the left, whose torso
alone has survived. The barbarian stands above his falling and dying allies, though he himself is
still continuing to fight.
The Turning Barbarian figure is also seen on the Palazzo Giustiniani sarcophagus (10).
Here, the barbarian strides to the left towards the central Roman horseman. The pair stands out
from the surrounding action as the clear focal point. Twisting so that his back is turned to the
viewer, the position of the barbarian is the direct opposite of that of the Roman horseman, who
50

twists his torso to face towards the viewer. The two realistically represent the spatial relationship
between a fighting pair. Their gazes meet, and the two almost appear to be frozen in time,
directly on the cusp of a dramatic encounter. Without actually engaging directly in the action, the
figures represent the idea of a battle and allow the viewer to infer what has happened and what is
about to happen. The frontal torso of the Roman invites the viewer into his position within the
scene to face off against this fearless barbarian.
A figure that looks like the Turning Barbarian type is found on the far left of the Large
Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (17). It is difficult on this particular scene to tell if this figure
is a Roman or barbarian. The figure holds his right arm to his side and raises his left arm high,
stretching up towards the wall that is being besieged in the background. The turning barbarian
has a small role on the Portonaccio sarcophagus (16). Just to the right of the main central figure,
a barbarian turns back to face a Roman horseman. This barbarian is on a horse, but his twisting
body and raised arm are similar to the other examples we have seen. He looks up to his attacker
and raises his left arm in supplication or defense, his sword by his side. Although unobscured by
the surrounding action, the dramatic bend of the barbarian’s neck makes him a sympathetic
figure rather than a heroic one. The importance of the Turning Barbarian figure becomes less
prominent on these later sarcophagi.
A variation on this figure can be seen on the Small Campo Santo sarcophagus (7). On the
far right of the scene, a nude barbarian faces the back of the scene and awkwardly bends his neck
to look upwards. His left arm raises a shield in defense and his right arm bears a sword. Instead
of stretching out bravely towards his enemy, this barbarian seems to cower back with fear. The
figure creates chiasmic composition with the four surrounding figures, though this grouping,
which I will call the Small Campo Santo Circle, is different from the Dallas Museum Circle
51

[compare figs. 35 and 36]. The Turning Barbarian looks diagonally towards a Roman horseman
to the upper left. This Roman raises his arm to strike the Turning Barbarian. Their line of vision
crosses over a second, diagonally placed pair, another a fight between a Roman soldier and a
barbarian who tries to defend himself. This second barbarian carries the crumpled body of one of
his fallen comrades. There is another Turning Barbarian on the far left of the Campo Santo
sarcophagus who strides to the left, turning so his back faces the viewer. On his left arm, he
raises his shield to protect himself from the oncoming attack of a Roman soldier on horseback,
whose sword is raised.107 This barbarian bravely faces his opponent. His partial twist is not only
more inviting for the viewer, but also more realistically represents the spatial relationship
between himself and his opponent.
Another similar adaptation of the Turning Barbarian is found on the sarcophagus from
Concordia University (6). Again, on the far right of the scene, a barbarian wearing trousers
stands to fill the full height of the scene. He holds his shield before him and draws back as a
Roman soldier advances towards him, his sword raised and ready to strike. On both the Small
Campo Santo (7) and the Concordia University (6) sarcophagi, the barbarian, who is only
partially twisted, focuses his attention towards his attacker, drawing the viewers’ attention
similarly towards the Roman soldiers. Unlike in the other examples, these turned barbarians are
preparing to be struck down, rather than looking as though they have a real chance in the battle.
Rather than representing a heroic enemy, they display the imminent victory of their Roman
assailants.
Three Riders Group

107

This figure corresponds with the Central Commander C type, discussed below.

52

Andreae also identifies a figural group called the “Three Riders Group” (die
Dreitreitergruppe). One figure within this group is a barbarian whose horse falls face first to the
ground, its forehead touching the ground between its front two legs, which I will call the
Collapsing Horse [fig. 37].108 The barbarian himself is tossed forward on the horse, lying almost
flat on the creature’s back. This figure can be found on the bottom left of the Large Campo Santo
sarcophagus (12), the center of the Ince Blundell sarcophagus (11), to the right of the center on
the Small Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (3), on the left of the Badia di Cava sarcophagus (9),
and on the far right of the Small Ludovisi sarcophagus (5). In each of these examples, no one is
visibly attacking the falling barbarian, rather it seems as though the damage has already been
done. This man is caught in his final, falling moment. Andreae also points to examples where the
horse can be seen without a rider, such as on the Ammendola (1), Large Villa Doria Pamphili
(17), Dallas Museum (2), Villa Borghese (13), and Palermo (14) sarcophagi. The second figure
in Andreae’s “Three Riders Group” is a Gaul who flees in the background of the scene,
sometimes pursued by the third figure in the group, a Roman horseman. This last figure is quite
clear on Andreae’s four sarcophagi and on the Dallas Museum sarcophagus, but is not readily
found on the other sarcophagi in this study. The Fleeing Barbarian figure [fig. 38] is found on a
wide variety of the sarcophagi, usually in the background trying to escape the battle.
Execution Group
The next group identified by Andreae includes a Roman soldier who holds the hair of a
barbarian kneeling before him (über Wältigungsgruppe).109 This Execution Group [fig. 39] is the
most commonly used group on the battle sarcophagi. Usually, the Roman soldier raises his right

108
109

Andreae 1956, pp. 49-54.
Andreae 1956, pp. 56-65.

53

arm ready to strike, while the barbarian tries to push away the hand that grasps his hair. This
scene does not represent a real struggle, but an execution. The Roman soldier is the clear victor.
The figural group is seen in its most typical form on the Ammendola (1), Small Villa
Doria Pamphili (3), Dallas Museum (2), and Via Tiburtina (4) sarcophagi. These four examples
are almost identical, each featuring a nude barbarian who looks up at his assailant. The dramatic
expression of the barbarian is clear; his mouth and eyes open wide with fear as he tries to push
away the grasp of the Roman soldier above him. Another similar example is on the Villa
Borghese sarcophagus (13). This clothed barbarian does not reach up to the Roman soldier, his
expression more somber than dramatic; he seems to have accepted his fate. The grouping on the
Concordia University sarcophagus (6) also features a clothed barbarian, who kneels rather
awkwardly, his neck bent back impossibly so that he faces the Roman who stands behind him.
The barbarian holds his arm above his head in despair as the Roman’s sword plunges into his
neck.
On the Palermo sarcophagus (14), a nude barbarian kneels in the center of the scene and a
Roman soldier stands behind him. The arms of both figures are missing, though the barbarian’s
neck is bent back awkwardly in such a way that suggests his hair is being grabbed by the Roman.
The expression on the barbarian’s face is passive, though his dying allies who surround him add
to the drama of the scene. This Execution Group is found on the far right of the Ludovisi
sarcophagus, where a barbarian sits on the ground, his hair held by a Roman soldier in a tunic,
whose sword is drawn. A second pair on the left of the sarcophagus depicts a similar scene,
except the Roman holds his hand under the chin of a barbarian who kneels with his arms crossed
before him in supplication.
The Trumpeter
54

Another figural type on the battle scenes is the Trumpeter (der Tubicen) [fig. 40].110
Andreae identifies the Trumpeter on the Small Ludovisi (5) and Small Villa Doria Pamphili (3)
sarcophagi, and assumes that a trumpeter would have been depicted on the Via Tiburtina
sarcophagus (4) where the scene is now damaged. The trumpets on the Small Ludovisi (5) and
Small Villa Doria Pamphili (3) sarcophagi are now missing. The positioning of the Trumpeter on
the Small Ludovisi (5) makes it obvious that he once held a trumpet, though the Trumpeter on
the Small Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (3) stands awkwardly, with his right arm
outstretched and his left arm on his head. His position becomes clearer when compared to the
Trumpeters on the Badia di Farfa (8) and Palazzo Giustiniani (10) sarcophagi. These trumpeters
raise their trumpets with their left arms outstretched and right hands on their heads, the same
positioning as the Small Villa Doria Pamphili trumpeter. Roman trumpeters are similarly present
on the right side of the Small Campo Santo sarcophagus (7) and on the left side of the Ince
Blundell sarcophagus (11).
Two trumpeters are depicted on the Large Ludovisi sarcophagus (18). A Roman
trumpeter stands on the right of the scene, hidden in the background of the action. On the left
side of the scene, a barbarian trumpeter stands in plain view, framed by the horn that encircles
his head. This particular horn resembles the one that lies on the ground on the Dying Gaul statue,
which is discussed above. The Trumpeter type can also be seen hidden in the background of the
Large Villa Doria Pamphili (17), Large Campo Santo (12), Portonaccio (16), and Villa Borghese
(13) sarcophagi.
The Commander

110

Andreae 1956, pp. 65-67. Various depictions of trumpeters are discussed in detail in Alexandrescu 2010.

55

One of the most common figural types in these battles scenes is the central Roman
cavalryman, here called the Central Commander. This figure usually stands out dramatically
from the rest of the scene and is assumed to represent a Roman commander or to act as a
representation and sometimes a portrait of the deceased. These central figures can be divided into
three separate types. In many of these examples, the horse of the central figure leaps over a
falling or fallen barbarian, creating a juxtaposition between the victor and the tragic defeat of his
enemy. This fallen barbarian, which I call the Cowering Barbarian [fig. 41], is often seen sitting
on the ground, leaning back upon one arm and looking up with horror at his assailant. This
Cowering Barbarian type wears a tunic that is tied at his waist and falls from one shoulder,
leaving his lower half completely exposed. He looks up at the commander with his mouth wide
in fear and awe. The Cowering Barbarian is featured prominently on the Ammendola (1), Dallas
Museum (2), Small Villa Doria Pamphili (3), Via Tiburtina (4), Concordia University (6), Ince
Blundell (11), and Palermo (14) sarcophagi, as well as on the Palazzo Giustiniani Fragment (15).
A similarly cowering figure can be seen on the Badia di Farfa (8) and Badia di Cava (9)
sarcophagi, though these two barbarians have different attire from the other examples.
The first commander type, Central Commander A [fig. 42], is most reminiscent of
imperial art from the period, such as the image of Trajan on the Great Trajanic Relief. In this
depiction, the central figure twists on his horse so that his torso turns out towards the viewer. His
chin is raised and his head looks out to the left. The rider flings his right arm out, causing his
cloak to billow dramatically behind him. Such a figure can be seen on the Large Ludovisi
sarcophagus (18) and on the sarcophagus from Concordia University (6). On the Large Ludovisi
(18) example, the central figure is so disengaged that he stands out not only from the surrounding
action but also from his own horse: he only rides the horse in concept, while in reality he floats
56

off of the horse’s back in such a way that is not physically possible. Because these Central
Commander A figures look up and away from the action, they do not play an active role within
the battle narrative; instead, they are removed from the chaos in order to revel in their own
victory. Their faces show distinctive features, which may indicate that the central figure was
intended to show a portrait. Because of the figures’ prominence within each scene, these portrait
features can be assumed to represent the deceased.
Another type of central figure, Central Commander B [fig. 43], looks to the right. On all
of these examples, the horse leaps to the right, and the commander twists only slightly on the
back of the horse so that his torso faces out towards the viewer. As seen above, this often forces
the central figure into an impossible sitting position. On the Palermo sarcophagus (14), the
central figure flings his right arm out in a gesture of victory, similar to those shown in the
previous group. What sets him apart is his gaze, which is focused before him, perhaps towards
the nude barbarian who strides towards him. He is removed from the action by his unobscured
positioning within the scene and the fact that he does not raise a weapon, but his attention is still
directed towards the battle. The viewer is thus encouraged not just to revel in the glory of the
commander, despite the surrounding chaos, but also to appreciate his role within the chaos. The
commander’s gaze directs the viewer towards the fighting, suggesting that he himself was
cognizant of the drama that war entails. Of the other sarcophagi with Central Commander B,
many of the central figures are missing their right arms. It is therefore possible that some of these
figures may have been similarly raising an empty hand in triumph, but based on the angles of
these arms, it is far more likely that they once held weapons. These include the Small Ludovisi
(5), Small Campo Santo (7), and Villa Borghese (13) sarcophagi. On each of these, the
commander stands out, seated in the same impossible twisting position with his cloak billowing
57

behind him. The central figure on the Small Campo Santo sarcophagus (7) is somewhat obscured
by the horse of the barbarian he is fighting, and he leans forward on his horse at a different angle
from the other examples. Portrait features can be seen on the face of this central figure, such as
his pronounced chin and curly hair. The faces of the commander on the Small Ludovisi (5) and
Villa Borghese (13) sarcophagi have either been damaged or were never completed. The Villa
Borghese sarcophagus (13) stands out from the others in this group, as the commander does not
look directly towards his enemy, but instead focuses down upon the victim. This slight change in
the angle of his head alters his seated posture and dramatically redirects the attention of the
viewer. If the viewer follows the outward gazes on the other examples in this group, they are
encouraged to look along the top of the scene to the right of the Central Commander B, where
Roman soldiers dominate the upper part of the scene. When a Central Commander B figure is
looking towards an enemy, that enemy stands on the same ground as the central figure, and thus
has a visible fighting chance despite the imminent defeat. But for the Central Commander B on
the Villa Borghese sarcophagus (13), his opponent is already below him. The commander’s gaze
draws the viewer directly into the action, towards the men who lie dying and defeated at the feet
of the commander, creating a dramatic composition.
On other sarcophagi with the Central Commander B type, the arm of the commander is
entirely preserved or better preserved, making it quite clear that he is holding a weapon. These
include the Large Villa Doria Pamphili (17), Palazzo Giustiniani (10), and Portonaccio (16)
sarcophagi, as well as the Palazzo Giustiniani Fragment (15). Each of these three commanders
holds his weapon in a different way. The central figure on the Palazzo Giustiniani sarcophagus
(10) looks directly to the right towards a standing barbarian who strides towards him. Portrait
features have been applied to this figure, whose right arm is drawn back with a weapon. By not
58

raising his weapon over his head, he exudes an aura of composure and determination, his pose
static and statuesque. The central figure on the Large Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (17) also
has portrait features, such as his large nose and pronounced brow. This man is much more
dramatically positioned within the scene. Instead of trotting directly to the right, his horse
projects forward and turns its head back to the left, creating the illusion of the commander riding
directly out of the scene. His right arm is raised high as he prepares to strike. Yet his body
positioning is quite rigid, his gaze directed outwards rather than towards a specific enemy. On
the Portonaccio sarcophagus (16), the face of the central figure is blank. It seems that the portrait
features were never completed, either unintentionally due to lack of time or intentionally for the
sake of making the scene more generic. This commander is shown on a larger scale than the
other figures. His body twists to face the viewer and with his right arm he raises a spear. Unlike
the commander on the Large Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (17), this central figure looks
downwards, directly towards his barbarian victim who holds out an arm in supplication. As on
the Villa Borghese sarcophagus (13), the focus of this general invites the viewer to focus not on
his victory but on his active role within the chaotic battle.
The last commander type is discussed by Andreae in detail.111 This commander figure,
Central Commander C [fig. 44], is often not placed in the center of the scene, but slightly to the
left. Nevertheless, the pose of this figure is distinctive: instead of twisting his torso outwards
towards the viewer, the figure turns into the scene, raising his right arm so that it covers his face
from view. As a result, the figure is hunched over on his horse. In all instances, a Cowering
Barbarian figure sits on the ground before the commander, his raised arm bent either in defense
or in an act of suicide. This figural group is found on the Ammendola (1), Small Villa Doria

111

Andreae 1956, pp. 72-74.

59

Pamphili (3), Via Tiburtina (4), and Dallas Museum (2) sarcophagi. Only on the Ammendola
sarcophagus (1) is the figure centrally placed. This figure stands out on all of these sarcophagi,
separated from the action, and on the Ammendola (1) and Dallas Museum (2) sarcophagi, the
figure is rendered on a larger scale. His position on his horse is not physically possible, and the
horse’s head turns back awkwardly. Because the commander figure on these sarcophagi has his
face covered, portrait features of the deceased could not be added, making the scene generic. It is
possible that the person interred within these sarcophagi was not in the army, and this battle
scene was merely a symbolic representation of virtue in a broader sense. On the Small Ludovisi
(5) sarcophagus, which is centered around a Central Commander B type, the Central Commander
C is also found on the far left of the scene.
Even more surprising are the few sarcophagi that do not have a central figure. Instead of
a central Roman horseman, the Badia di Farfa sarcophagus (8) is centered on a Falling Barbarian
B figure. The only figure close to the central commander type is to the left of the scene, a
horseman who leans back as he prepares to strike, but this figure is unremarkable and blends into
the surrounding action. Similarly, the center of the Ince Blundell sarcophagus (11) is split
between two prominent figures. One is a Roman horseman who, although rushing to the right,
twists and looks back to the left towards a fallen barbarian, and the other is a nude barbarian who
stands to fill the entire height of the scene, his head tilted dramatically upwards. Neither of these
figures stands out from the other figures within the scene. In both of these examples, there is no
main central focus to guide the viewer’s attention within the scene, thus encouraging the viewer
to look instead at the battle scene as a whole, focusing equally on the Roman and barbarian
figures.
Other Trends in Composition
60

Many of the battle scenes on these sarcophagi are framed on either side. The most
common framing device is tropaea and barbarian captives. On the Ammendola (1), Small Villa
Doria Pamphili (3), and Ince Blundell (11) sarcophagi, these captives are seated below the
tropaea with their hands tied behind their backs. The captives, displayed on the same scale as the
rest of the figures, turn their torsos towards the viewer while turning their legs towards the
action, a position that invites the viewer into the scene. Other sarcophagi have a set of barbarian
captives, one male and one female, standing below the tropaea, sometimes accompanied by a
child or a helmet. This group, often scaled much larger than the rest of the figures within the
scene, appears on the Portonaccio (16), Large Villa Doria Pamphili (17), Large Campo Santo
(12), Palermo (14), and Villa Borghese (13) sarcophagi. These are the only battle sarcophagi that
include female barbarians on the main scene. The Large Ludovisi (18) and the Small Campo
Santo (7) sarcophagi are both framed by tropaea without barbarian captives. Another framing
option is seen on the Small Ludovisi (5), Via Tiburtina (4), and Palazzo Giustiniani (10)
sarcophagi. Instead of using tropaea to symbolize Roman victory, these sarcophagi are framed
by winged Victories who fly above seated barbarian captives. On each example, the Victory
figure flies away from the battle but looks back upon the action. The winged Victories on the Via
Tiburtina sarcophagus (4) hold tropaea towards the soldiers. All of these various framing types
symbolize Roman victory over her barbarian enemy.
The inevitability of Roman victory is further emphasized by the placement of figures
within the scenes. Consider the Small Campo Santo sarcophagus (7): every figure along the top
half of the scene is a Roman soldier, while the middle and bottom of the scene is filled with
barbarians. The same is true on the Palazzo Giustiani sarcophagus. This division of space
between the Romans and the enemy is a common trope in Roman imperial art, as discussed
61

above on the Column of Trajan and Column of Marcus Aurelius. On imperial art, however, the
division of space was achieved laterally, whereas the division of space on the sarcophagi is
vertical. By placing the Romans soldiers towards the top of the scene, the sculptor was able to
emphasize the inevitable victory of the Romans over the barbarians who fall at their feet.
The other battle sarcophagi show a trend away from this division of space. In the case of
the Ammendola (1) sarcophagus, most of the Roman soldiers stand above their barbarian
opponents, but two barbarians break this division. One is the Fleeing Barbarian, who rushes to
the left in the background, and the second is the Turning Barbarian, who stretches his body to fill
the entire height of the scene. Although barbarians fill the bottom half of the scene with their
broken bodies, the upper part of the scene is no longer reserved for the victorious Romans alone.
This trend continues and becomes prominent on the Portonaccio sarcophagus (16). Barbarian
bodies still fill the lower part of the scene, but the rest of the scene is a conglomeration of Roman
and barbarian fighters. Although the presence of the tropaea and barbarian captives framing the
scene makes Roman victory forthcoming, the mixing of barbarians and Romans makes the scene
chaotic and realistic. The Romans do not merely destroy an inferior enemy, but face off against a
worthy opponent. There is clearly some risk involved for the Roman soldiers, a risk which is
ignored in scenes such as on the Small Campo Santo sarcophagus (7).
The confusion created by the lack of division of space is further aided by the
crowdedness of these scenes. None of the battles have scenery in the backgrounds, with the
exception of the city walls on the Large Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (17). Other
mythological sarcophagi, when backgrounds are lacking, will use different sized figures and putti
to fill in the empty spaces; however, most of the figures on the battle sarcophagi are rendered on
the same scale, with the exception of the sometimes larger Central Commander and framing
62

figures. While some of the sarcophagi have a mild amount of empty space remaining due to this
lack of scenery, as on the Concordia University sarcophagus (6), most of them fill this empty
space with flailing limbs, flowing garments, and raised shields. On the Dallas Museum
sarcophagus (2), the emptiness behind the head of the Central Commander C is filled with his
billowing sagum. On the Palazzo Giustiniani sarcophagus (10), the Fleeing Barbarian in the
background raises his shield to fill the empty space beside his head. This pattern continues on the
Portonaccio sarcophagus (16), upon which it is impossible to find any empty space between the
limbs, cloaks, and weapons. This traps the viewer’s gaze within the scene, moving from one
falling body to the next, unable to leave the chaos of the battle.
Iconography
Another major trend among all of these battle sarcophagi is the tendency for the figures
to be dressed. All of the Roman soldiers are shown in military garb, almost all of them in full
uniform, including a helmet, tunic, cuirass, greaves, and a sagum. Showing Romans fully clothed
is a trend that is characteristic of Roman art as a whole. But the dress of the barbarians on these
sarcophagi is much more variable. The sarcophagi can be divided into three groups based on the
clothing on the barbarians: mostly nude, mostly dressed, and completely dressed.
Seven sarcophagi show barbarians who are almost all nude. Four of these are the
sarcophagi that Andreae focuses on in his book: the Ammendola (1), Villa Doria Pamphili, Small
Ludovisi (5), and Via Tiburtina (4) sarcophagi. He chose these four due to their strong
compositional similarities. To these four should be added the Dallas Museum sarcophagus (2).
On all five of these sarcophagi, most of the barbarians are shown wearing only a torque or cloak.
The exception is the Cowering Barbarian who sits below the Central Commander C figure. This
barbarian wears a loose tunic that is bound on one hip and slips from his shoulders. The wild hair
63

and mustaches sported by all of the barbarians on these five sarcophagi suggest that they are
based on the Pergamene style of representing Gauls. The other two sarcophagi in this mostly
nude group are the Palazzo Giustiniani (10) and the Ince Blundell (11) sarcophagi. Every
barbarian on the Palazzo Giustiniani sarcophagus (10) is nude, with the exception of the
occasional helmet or cloak. On the Ince Blundell sarcophagus (11), three barbarians are fully
clothed in trousers or a tunic, and the rest are nude. The standing barbarian near the center of the
scene is distinct as one of the few examples on these Roman battle sarcophagi of full frontal
nudity. The depiction of a nude enemy is common in Greek art, and is often used in Roman art in
order to mythologize a scene.112 These sarcophagi do not necessarily show a real enemy that
Rome was currently facing, but rather the Gauls, whom the Romans had historically fought in
the past.
In the second group of battle sarcophagi, the majority of the barbarians are dressed and
only a few are shown nude. On the Palermo (14) and Small Campo Santo (7) sarcophagi, the
barbarians are dressed in tunics or trousers, and again have the wild hair and facial hair of Gauls.
The barbarians on the Badia di Farfa sarcophagus (8) are similarly dressed, but some also wear
crested helmets. Here, there is shift away from the unreal enemy of the past to a more realistic
enemy of the present.
All of the barbarians are dressed on the final group of battle sarcophagi, including the
Concordia University (6), Large Ludovisi (18), Large Campo Santo (12), Villa Borghese (13),
Large Villa Doria Pamphili (17), and Portonaccio (16) sarcophagi. All of these sarcophagi have a
crowded composition, in part due to their larger size, which allowed the sculptor to play with

112

For a discussion of the uses of nudity in Greek art, see Hurwit 2007. For a discussion of the uses of nudity in
Roman art, see Hallett 2005.

64

multiple ground levels. This crowdedness is emphasized by the fact that all of the barbarians
wear clothes, as their clothing helps to fill in all available space. By showing all of the barbarians
in clothes, these sarcophagi suggest a greater tendency towards depicting the reality of battle
rather than elevating the enemy to a superhuman or mythological status. These barbarians may
be intended to represent a more recent Roman enemy, such as the Dacians or Germanic tribes.113
Another trend in the depiction of the barbarian fighters is to show excessive emotion on
their faces. This is best seen on the barbarians who sit on the ground and look up at their Roman
assailants with their mouths and eyes wide, such as the Cowering Barbarian on the Dallas
Museum sarcophagus (2). Wild and unrestrained emotion was discussed above on the Athena
panel from the Altar of Zeus at Pergamon, and was often used in Hellenistic art for the depiction
of the barbaric enemy. But on these Roman battle sarcophagi, this unrestrained emotion
sometimes spreads to the Roman soldiers as well, which is quite different from the Altar of Zeus’
use of calm control on the faces of the gods and goddesses. On the Dallas Museum sarcophagus
(2), a Roman soldier on the right of the scene holds his hand to his head, his mouth wide and his
eyes turned upwards. Although restraint is commonly shown on the Roman soldiers, the
occasional use of extreme emotion is indicative of a new trend in understanding the effects of
war on the soldiers involved. Yet this negative emotional response to the battles is short-lived, as
evidenced by the Large Ludovisi sarcophagus (18), the latest example in this study. The Romans
on this sarcophagus all look quite proud of their actions, despite the surrounding slaughter.
Restraint is also maintained on the faces of every central commander figure, again emphasizing
the connection between this figure and depictions of the Roman emperor in state reliefs.

113

Notably, the clothing shown on the sarcophagi is similar to the clothing of the barbarians on the columns of
Trajan and Marcus Aurelius.

65

For the Central Commander A and B types, the faces of these figures are a prominent part
of their scenes, further emphasized by the fact that they are usually the only Roman soldiers who
do not wear helmets. Often it seems that portrait features have been added to these central
figures. For example, the Central Commander A on the Concordia University sarcophagus (6)
has chubby cheeks and a small nose. The Central Commander B on the Palermo sarcophagus
(14) has a thick beard, curly hair, and a wrinkled brow. Attempts have even been made to
identify the Central Commander A on the Large Ludovisi sarcophagus (18), who has a
prominent brow and wide nose. In some cases, the face of the Central Commander is blank, as
seen on the Portonaccio (16) and Villa Borghese (13) sarcophagi. This may be the result of
damage done to the sarcophagus, but it is more likely that the portraits were never added to these
pieces. Either this was done unintentionally, as the customer could not wait for the workshop to
complete the portrait, or unintentionally as a means of generalizing the scene. If the latter is true,
then the faceless Central Commander A and B types act in the same manner as the Central
Commander C, whose face is entirely obscured. This allows the viewer to put himself in the role
of the victorious general.
Conclusion
As discussed in Chapter 2, Andreae illustrated the figural types found on the Roman
battle sarcophagi, and any variations within these types, in order to recreate a now lost original
work upon which these scenes were based, with particular attention paid to his main group of
four sarcophagi. There are two major issues with Andreae’s examination of these sarcophagi.
First, he focused on only four sarcophagi, resulting in a limited presentation of repeated figural
types and groups. As shown above, many of his figural groups are not limited to these four, but
are widely represented on a variety of battle sarcophagi. Secondly, his argument relied on a
66

production-to-order model of production, which does not allow for the possibility of a workshop
maintaining a stock of sarcophagi. Without this stock, Andreae argued that similarities in
composition could not be explained as works of the same workshop. Recent research on
sarcophagus production and distribution has greatly altered our understanding of how they were
commissioned and sold, and this second issue will be thoroughly examined in Chapter 7.
Andreae was correct that four Roman battle sarcophagi stand out thanks to their striking
similarities, though the group he cited should be modified. The Ammendola (1), the Small Via
Tiburtina (4), the Small Villa Doria Pamphili (3), and the Dallas Museum (2) sarcophagi share
the most similar compositions. Andreae had included the Small Ludovisi sarcophagus (5) in this
group, but its scene, while sharing many of the same figural types, is composed rather differently
from the other three, so I have chosen to exclude it from this group. The Dallas Museum
sarcophagus (2), on the other hand, is nearly identical to the Ammendola sarcophagus (1) and
has therefore been added to the discussion. Unlike the other sarcophagi, which only share a
handful of common figural types and groupings, these four sarcophagi repeat the exact layout of
these groups, as well as the subtle stylistic trends in rendering the figures. I will refer to this
group as the Ammendola Group, since the Ammendola sarcophagus (1) is the most basic
composition of the four, featuring just four of the figural groups discussed above. The other three
feature slight alterations to this scene. On the Ammendola sarcophagus (1), the scene begins on
the left with the Falling Barbarian A figure and the Roman Horseman standing over him. Next,
the Central Commander C looks down upon the Cowering Barbarian. In the background, the
Fleeing Barbarian rushes to the left. The head of a Collapsing Horse can be seen behind the
Cowering Barbarian, and to the right the Turning Barbarian fills the height of the scene. The
scene ends with the Execution Group. In the case of the Dallas Museum sarcophagus (2), which
67

is almost identical to the Ammendola sarcophagus (1), two figures were added on the far right of
the scene. The Small Villa Doria Pamphili sarcophagus (3) is identical to the Ammendola (1),
with the addition of a figure riding the Collapsing Horse. On the Small Via Tiburtina
sarcophagus (4), the scene is identical, but split in half between the Cowering Barbarian and the
Execution Group, with a few other, now heavily damaged figures inserted into the center of the
scene.
The figural types used on the sarcophagi in the Ammendola Group are not exclusive to
the Ammendola Group, as has been illustrated in this chapter. Indeed, these figures are widely
repeated on all of the battle sarcophagi, though with various spatial relationships. The repetition
of figures such as the Turning Barbarian or the various Central Commander types, suggests that
these were common tropes in Roman art, both of which have already been shown on the imperial
friezes above. As an example, the Small Ludovisi (5) uses many of the same figural types,
including the Central Commander C, Falling Barbarian A, Collapsing Horse, and Roman
Horseman. Unlike the Ammendola Group, however, the Central Commander C figure is on the
far left of the scene, while the Falling Barbarian A is on the far right. The sarcophagus uses the
same figural types to create a different composition. This is also clear on the Ince Blundell
sarcophagus (11), which combines the Roman Horseman with the Cowering Barbarian figure
and the Central Commander B type with the Turning Barbarian. If one were to consider the
wider group of all Roman battle sarcophagi, it is clear that prototypes for individual figures must
have existed, rather than a prototype for the complete composition. Instead of searching for a
single battle scene as the inspiration for all of these sarcophagi, as Andreae proposed, it is likely
that the shared prototype was not a complete narrative scene, but a number of disjointed figures
or groups of figures that were assembled by the sarcophagus sculptors to create comprehensive
68

scenes. If this is correct, and all of the Roman battle sarcophagi share a variety of statues and
statue groups as their inspiration, then we must reject Andreae’s theory that the Ammendola
Group was inspired by a single painted prototype.
Identifying the possible inspiration for these figural types requires us to return the
Hellenistic statues discussed in Chapter 3. The Roman copies of the Pergamene statues of Gauls
may all be cited as prototypes for these barbarian figures. The Ludovisi Gaul may have inspired
the Turning Barbarian. Both twist through space and hold their swords high over their shoulders.
The Kneeling Gaul may have inspired the Cowering Barbarian, as their body positions and
slipping tunics are identical. The body positioning of the Venice Falling Gaul is reminiscent of
the Falling Barbarian C type. The preponderance of collapsing and dying figures recalls the
various dying enemies from the Attalid dedications. The scenes on the sarcophagi seem to be a
conglomeration of these disparate figural types, all joined together in various ways to create
comprehensive scenes. In addition to the figures themselves, the overall sense of depth presented
on the battle sarcophagi, as figures twist through space and entice the viewer to conceptualize the
full three-dimensionality of the figures, takes its inspiration from these Pergamene statues, which
require the viewer to observe the statues from every angle in order to fully appreciate them. The
battle scenes on the imperial columns do not have this same impact as those on the sarcophagi.
As noted by Hamberg, it is as if the scenes on the battle sarcophagi are composed of various
statues that had been packed together and applied to a marble slab.114
In addition to these specific compositional types and groups, the battle sarcophagi
develop over time from disjointed scenes towards more unified fusions of the whole.115 It is as

114
115

Hamberg 1945, p. 175.
This evolution of style on the sarcophagi is traced in Hamberg 1945, pp. 172-186.

69

though the initial, individual statuary prototypes had become so standardized in form that
sculptors were comfortable in making minor adjustments to these figures in order to allow more
than two figures to interact at once. As an example, consider the chiastic composition found on
the Campo Santo sarcophagus [fig. 36]. The sculptor was not limited to the one-on-one fighting
pairs, but instead portrayed these single combats in such a way that they began to form a unified
whole. This pattern culminates on the Portonaccio sarcophagus (16), where it is often impossible
to see where one fighting pair stops and the other begins. Instead, all of the men are fighting
throughout the same space. This is not the same as the fighting masses that dominate the imperial
reliefs, which show two distinct walls of soldiers facing off; rather, these scenes are filled at
random with both Romans and barbarians, expanding on a trend that was being tested on the
imperial reliefs.
Another trend discussed in the imperial art of this period was the removal of the
commander from the surrounding chaos. Some of the earlier sarcophagi have no central figure,
and Central Commander C type found on the Ammendola Group, while prominent, has his face
obscured. The barbarians on these sarcophagi are also mostly nude, implying that these scenes
are meant to show a generic and almost mythologized account of Roman battles against an
historical enemy of the past. Eventually, the commander figures become more pronounced,
though they are often still engaged with the action, as seen with the Central Commander B type
on the Villa Borghese (13) and Portonaccio (16) sarcophagi. These two sarcophagi also show a
fully dressed enemy, suggesting that these depictions were intended to present a realistic account
of battle. Over time, the commander figures on the sarcophagi become even more separated from
the action until the development of the Central Commander A type on the Ludovisi sarcophagus,
who actually rises off of his horse and towards the sky as an idealization of Roman virtue.
70

The imperial reliefs also showed a trend towards increasingly exaggerated and unrealistic
perspective. Although none of the battle sarcophagi feature more than a single ground line, there
is a tendency towards showing an extremely slanted perspective, almost as though multiple
ground lines exist, but are completely obscured by figures reaching and falling across them. The
earliest battle sarcophagi do not show this slanted perspective; their height is equal to the height
of the tallest figure within the scene, as on the Concordia University sarcophagus (6), so only a
single ground line with a normal perspective was possible. The Small Villa Doria Pamphili
sarcophagus (3) is an example of a scene in which the sculptor was experimenting with the more
slanted perspective, similar to what was done on the Column of Trajan. The horsemen in the
background of this scene seem to fly through the air, adding a greater sense of depth to the scene.
This trend continues until the Portonaccio (16) and Large Villa Doria Pamphili (17) sarcophagi,
both of which use slanted perspective in a way similar to the frieze on the Column of Marcus
Aurelius and the panels on the Arch of Septimius Severus. The effect of this new compositional
technique is twofold. By allowing figures to stand above and behind one another, the scenes
become more crowded, with barbarians and Romans fighting on every inch. Similarly, the use of
slanted perspective allows for figures to fall between the imaginary ground lines, creating the
impression of greater depth and perpetual motion. This is unlike the multiple ground lines on
imperial reliefs, which are completely separate and defined; instead, the slanted perspective gives
the idea of many rows of soldiers. This is particularly prominent on the Large Villa Doria
Pamphili sarcophagus (17), where men fall from the walls in the background of the scene and to
the ground in the forefront of the scene, engaged in hand-to-hand combat. It is as though the men
who fall from the walls then become the men who fight upon the ground; for them, there is no
escape from the battle. On the Portonaccio sarcophagus (16), slanted perspective is used to the

71

same effect. Barbarians in the upper part of the scene are being pursued and attacked, and the
viewer can imagine that these men will soon join their comrades who have already fallen to the
ground at the bottom of the scene. Figures on these sarcophagi fall as though there were separate
ground lines, as on the Arch of Septimius Severus.
This confusion of battle created by the use of multiple ground lines is further emphasized
by the use of small, standard sized figures. As an example, the figures on the Small Ludovisi
sarcophagus (5) are all about the same size. Instead of using larger or smaller figures to fill in the
empty spaces of the scene, the sculptor found a way to use more figures and more complex body
movements and patterns of billowing cloaks to fill the entire space. This not only creates greater
confusion within the scene, but also obscures the obvious dominance of the Roman soldiers over
the barbarians. In contrast, the central figure on the Large Campo Santo sarcophagus (12) and his
barbarian opponents are scaled differently, with the commander much larger and the barbarians
smaller. The smaller figures can easily fill in any empty gaps within the scene, but they are also
obviously inferior to their Roman opponent, creating a battle scene that has a clear victor, one
who will succeed with little difficulty. Confusion is added by the total lack of empty space,
especially on the later examples such as the Portonaccio sarcophagus (16), which force the eye of
the viewer to wander from body to body without a rest from the action.
The trends on these battle sarcophagi, therefore, directly reflect the developments
occurring from the time of Trajan to the time of Septimius Severus. Battles become less
mythologized and more realistic, through the addition of clothing as well as the representation of
actual combat. The disparate figural types and groups begin to be more fully integrated to create
chaotic scenes. This chaos is underscored by the smaller size of the figures, tightly squeezed to
fill the space, and the use of multiple ground lines. Eventually, the sarcophagi abandon the
72

standardized figures in favor of more complex body movements. Still, even the later battle
sarcophagi maintain a strong sense of three-dimensionality, causing the viewer to imagine the
full depth of the scene and to fill in any missing pieces.

73

Chapter 6: Workshops and Production
In this chapter, I will consider the production of the Roman battle sarcophagi and show
how by carefully considering the compositions of the battle scenes, it is possible to better
understand how sarcophagus workshops in Italy functioned. The variation present in the
compositions of the battle sarcophagi support the idea that they were largely produced in small
workshops; however, the similarities of compositions within the Ammendola Group suggest that
some workshops were capable of producing stock.116 Thus the battle sarcophagi support a
heterogeneous model of production.
Models of Production
As discussed above, various scholars, including Ian Morris, have shown that sarcophagus
use began in earnest during the mid-2nd century CE in Rome.117 This change in burial practice
also produced a new demand for sarcophagus production and trade.118 Sarcophagus production
involved a complex network of suppliers, skilled craftsmen, and expensive transportation.
Thanks to evidence at quarries and from shipwrecks, it has been possible in recent years to begin
to reconstruct the process of production and distribution.
There are various models that have been proposed in order to explain sarcophagus
production. One long-standing understanding of sarcophagus production was based on the
production to order model.119 This model assumes that the customer would place a specific order

116

These models of production do not take into account the strigilated and garland sarcophagi, which could be mass
produced due to their generic scenes. The existence of these more basic sarcophagus types accounts for the likely
high demand on sarcophagi which would have required workshops to be able to produce them in great quantities.
117
Morris 1992.
118
For an overview of the increased marble trade during the 2 nd century CE and imperial control of this market, see
Fant 1988, pp. 147-158. This idea of imperial control of the sarcophagus trade has since been rejected, see Russell
2013, p. 309.
119
This is the model used in Andreae 1956.

74

with a sarcophagus workshop, which would then order marble from the quarry and sculpt it
according to the desires of the customer. Sarcophagi were expensive and could have been deeply
personal works, and the production to order model therefore assumes that a customer would want
to have direct control over his order. This model places the customer at the forefront of the
decision making, as he is the one who chooses the specific size, shape, and decoration of the
sarcophagus. Bernard Andreae followed this production-to-order model when writing his book
on the compositions of the battle sarcophagi.120 He argued that, because the sarcophagi were
made to order, no stock of sarcophagi would have been available for workshops to copy, and the
iconography of each was thus independent.
In his 1980 article, John Ward-Perkins discussed the Roman marble trade and its
connection with Nicomedia in particular.121 More broadly, he examined the empire-wide
shipment of marbles, and the tendency for certain marbles to be used within select regions and
for particular purposes, such as the use of Proconnesian marble for garland sarcophagi, which
were particularly popular in the eastern Mediterranean. These sarcophagi were often shaped out
on site at the quarry, to be polished upon arriving at their destinations. Ward-Perkins uses other
evidence, such as the standardization of column lengths, which tended to be 40 Roman feet, and
the evidence for columns of the same length found unfinished in quarries, to argue for massproduction. Dissatisfied with the length of time a customer would have needed to wait for a
custom-ordered sarcophagus, which is problematic considering the immediacy of death, WardPerkins’ production-to-stock model suggests that marble was produced by quarries in bulk and
shipped to sculpting workshops, where they were completely carved and stored by the marble

120
121

Andreae 1956.
Ward-Perkins 1980, pp. 325-338.

75

workshops for later distribution.122 The sarcophagi were thus mass-produced, and the customer
played a secondary role, simply choosing a sarcophagus off the shelf.
Ben Russell has more recently reexamined the production-to-stock model for the marble
business, with specific consideration of the sarcophagus trade.123 Russell has attempted to
examine more thoroughly the actual effort that would have been required to make even a single
sarcophagus. Unlike Ward-Perkins’ production-to-stock model, Russell’s model focuses on the
stages of production and the resulting skill specialization for these various stages. A single
sarcophagus was ordered, quarried, and carved, requiring the involvement of at least three
separate parties. The result was the growing specialization of production, including the division
of labor at a quarry and the sculpting expertise at individual workshops. Russell identified two
different types of workshops, the sculpting and the quarrying, though both may have had an
equal hand in the final design of the sarcophagus, as many sarcophagi were roughly carved at the
quarry, only to be refined later on. Completing much of the carving at the quarry itself would
allow for easier carving, as marble is softest at the quarry, and easier shipment, as the sarcophagi
would be lighter. Instead of a production-to-stock or production-to-order model, Russell argued
that there is no single model that can be used for sarcophagus production. Production occurred in
a variety of forms depending on the customer’s distance from the quarry, the size of the
workshops, and consumer demand.
Russell recognized that it was necessary to identify at what step within the production the
customer became involved in order to understand how the sarcophagus industry functioned.
Three possibilities emerged: either the customer commissioned the entire production, ordering

122
123

See also Koch and Sichtermann 1982, pp. 613-614.
Russell 2011, pp. 119-147; 2013, pp. 256-310.

76

the exact design, which is then quarried and sculpted; he arrived at a sculpting workshop, which
had blank sarcophagi on hand that were ready to be carved, and commissioned a specific design;
or he simply purchased the product off the shelf.124 Andreae’s production-to-order assumes the
first of these, but this requires the customer either to order a sarcophagus before his death or to
wait for a long time with a corpse on hand before the final resting place was obtained. This has
been widely regarded as an unsatisfactory model for sarcophagus production. On the other hand,
Ward-Perkins’ production-to-stock model assumes the last of these, with sarcophagi being
purchased upon the death of a loved one and thus likely to be kept in stock. This scenario
required sculptors to have capital available to maintain a constant stock and to rely upon a degree
of predictability in the market.125
To combat these issues, Russell considered the scale of the sarcophagus industry. At
Rome in particular, the number of sarcophagi that were produced in the city, the variety of
marbles that were used, and the stylistic variation that exists on the final products suggests that
there were many workshops, all working on a small, more local scale. Smaller workshops are
less likely to have the capital required to maintain a large stock on hand. Russell therefore
recognized any standardization of form upon the sarcophagi as the result not of sarcophagi being
mass-produced for a stock supply, but rather the product of the growing popularity of stylistic
trends. The evidence for garland sarcophagi shows that they were largely shaped in the quarry
itself before the marble was transported, to be refined at a local workshop before sale; but for
sarcophagi with more complex scenes, which are greatly variable, it is increasingly likely that

124

There is also the question of whether a person would purchase his sarcophagus during his lifetime, but it is more
likely that sarcophagi were purchased by the surviving family; see Russell 2013, p. 259.
125
Strigilated and garland sarcophagi could more easily be produced to stock, as their styles were widely popular
and therefore presented little risk for workshops.

77

these were the product of many small scale workshops and that they were not mass-produced for
stock.
Nevertheless, there is evidence that some sarcophagi which would receive more elaborate
frieze decoration were quarried with one wall left thicker in order to later receive decoration. The
mid-3rd century CE San Pietro shipwreck from Taranto contained many such sarcophagi.126 The
sarcophagi found in this shipwreck also attest to a great variety of shapes and sizes being
transported together. The Torre Sgarrata shipwreck from Apulia, dated to about the end of the 2nd
century CE, presents similar evidence.127 Fifteen sarcophagi were discovered, all with a
rectangular outer shape, but of various sizes.
Russell argued that because sarcophagi were roughed out in some fashion at the quarry,
including examples where one wall is left thicker than the others, the quarries and workshops
must have had some inclination of what the consumer wanted from the beginning. He thus sees
the quarries as reactive to market trends and the requests of the sculpting workshops.
Standardization of form is inherent in Russell’s model, which arose not from the initiative of the
quarries and workshops to have stock on hand, but instead from the nature of art during this
period, which relied heavily on particular artistic and architectural themes for the expression of
status and power. Customers wanted their sarcophagi to look similar to others.128 The quarries
were thus reactive to the workshops and ultimately the consumers.
Production of Battle Sarcophagi

126

Parker 1992, p. 381; Ward-Perkins and Throckmorton 1965. See the discussion in Russell 2013, pp. 271-273.
Parker 1992, pp. 429-430; Throckmorton 1969.
128
Russell 2013, pp. 293-294.
127

78

Returning to the battle sarcophagi, Andreae’s production-to-order model is unsatisfying.
Both Ward-Perkins and Russell agree that it is unlikely that the marble for a sarcophagus was
obtained after the customer placed the order. This would have taken far too long for the order to
be completed. The disagreement between these two scholars is whether the sarcophagi were
carved and held to be purchased off the shelf, or left blank until a customer placed a request. The
variability and rarity of the battle sarcophagi suggests that they were produced in small
workshops, which allows us to reject the production-to-stock model. Small workshops would not
have had the capital to maintain a stock of fully completed sarcophagi for purchase, and were
therefore unlikely to produce sarcophagi with identical compositions, as no prototypes would
have been readily available for copying. If sarcophagi were needed somewhat urgently but were
not mass-produced, we must accept Russell’s explanation that marbles were kept in stock at
workshops, ready to be carved upon the request of a consumer. This is further supported by Stine
Birk’s study, in which he examined the backs of marble sarcophagi.129 He discovered that many
sarcophagi appear to have been carved from marble blocks that were not originally intended to
be used as sarcophagi. This reuse of marble would serve to reduce both the cost and time of
sarcophagus production, while allowing the customer to have a considerable degree of agency
over the decoration. He took this further by recognizing that some sarcophagi may have been
mostly, but not entirely, completed by sculptors at workshops, allowing for final details to be
added and changed according to the desires of the eventual purchaser.
Evidence for the actual carving of sarcophagi at a workshop is rare and is largely limited
to production in Attica and Asia Minor, but this evidence does allow us to reconstruct the
sculpting process. The lid of a boar-hunting sarcophagus, which is now in the Centrale

129

Birk 2012, pp. 13-37.

79

Montemartini in Rome, provides insight into the working stages [fig. 76]: the sarcophagus was
first hollowed out, then the design was roughed out, including the outlining of the figures on the
main scene in shallow relief using a chisel.130 Next, the main scene was carved and details were
added to the figures and the backgrounds, with greater depth being added by a drill. As a result
of this process, details could be added at the end, but a sarcophagus would be legible early on in
the sculpting process.131
Let us then assume that sculpting workshops held marbles on hand, with either roughed
out decoration or thicker walls to which decoration may be applied. Such marbles could receive
any variety of decoration from the entire corpus of Roman sarcophagi, whether a hunting scene,
a mythological scene, putti, or a battle. Though some workshops may have specialized in a single
type of scene, it is difficult to attribute sarcophagi to specific workshops as we lack evidence for
their findspots, and must therefore turn to their compositions. The variation on the battle scenes
suggests that there was no single model from which these scenes were designed, but rather a
general series of figural types that were traditionally assembled to compose the scene, as was
shown in Chapter 5.
This small scale workshop model is nuanced by the Ammendola Group. Each of these
sarcophagi feature battle scenes whose compositions are so similar that they appear to be direct
copies of each other or perhaps works from the same workshop. That is not to say that they were
the product of the same hand; indeed, many of the stylistic details vary greatly between the four,
which makes it likely that they were not crafted by the same sculptor. Nonetheless, the
similarities in composition and the stylistic choices made in the rendering of the body forms and

130

Bertoletti, Cima, and Talamo 2006, inv. 837; Rockwell 1993, pp. 109-110; Russell 2013, pp. 286-287.
This process was somewhat different for architectural and garland sarcophagi, as discussed in Russell 2013, pp.
287-291.
131

80

musculature suggest that the sculptors of each of these sarcophagi had similar training. It might
even be possible that one was a direct copy of another. Thus, in the case of the Ammendola
Group, it is likely that at least one workshop in Rome was capable of supporting some stock on
hand, which allowed the various sculptors at the workshop to repeat the composition.132
Nevertheless, the variability of the size, shape, and composition of the entire group of
battle sarcophagi suggests that most were carved at a variety of small workshops. This means
that they were unlikely to be produced to stock and sold off the shelves, as small workshops
would not have the available capital to support this style of production. Rather, some workshops
held a few marbles on hand which were carved by sculptors upon being ordered. The evidence
from the Ammendola Group for a single workshop capable of supporting a stock of sarcophagi,
combined with the greater variability of forms found on the wider corpus of battle sarcophagi,
supports Russell’s suggestion that we must consider a heterogeneous model of production.
Conclusion
Rather than assuming that all sarcophagi were made to order, and therefore no finished
sarcophagi would have been stored at a workshop, the Ammendola Group is evidence that some
sarcophagi were produced to stock. This stock of sarcophagi would have allowed sculptors at a
single workshop to recreate similar scenes or to copy preexisting scenes. The remaining battle
sarcophagi, with their unique compositions, were more likely produced by smaller workshops,
which either had blank marble caskets available to be carved, had access to other marble blocks

132

Andreae (1956, pp. 81-84) suggests that this group of sarcophagi were similar due to a common painted
prototype or pattern book. It is impossible to prove whether such a prototype existed.

81

which could be recut into sarcophagi, or had sarcophagi with partially rendered scenes, to which
finalizing details could be added according to the specifications of the purchaser.

82

Chapter 7: Amazonomachies on Sarcophagi
Battle between the Greeks and Amazons is a common motif on Roman sarcophagi during
the 2nd and 3rd centuries CE, born from the Classical Greek tendency towards mythologizing
battles, which was continued and expanded throughout the Hellenistic period.133 The
Amazonomachy symbolizes an epic struggle between Greeks and the Other, and is often used
alongside depictions of Gigantomachies, Centauromachies, and the Trojan War.134 This theme
was picked up by the Etruscans, who widely incorporated Amazons in their funerary art as well
as on various other media such as mirrors, and its popularity continued into the Roman period.
Various scholars, most prominently Richard Brilliant, have cited Amazonomachies as the
inspiration for the Roman battle sarcophagi, an assumption largely made because of the
popularity of the subject.135 In this chapter, I will show how the Roman battle sarcophagi and
Amazon sarcophagi share many stylistic and compositional features, and in particular how each
uses the same figural groupings that were discussed in Chapter 5. I will then consider how these
compositional similarities may affect our understanding of sarcophagus production. Rather than
assuming that Amazonomachies inspired the battle sarcophagi, I instead argue that earlier
Amazonomachy and battle sarcophagi would have been produced at workshops at the same time.
These workshops would have roughed out generic battle scenes upon the sarcophagi, to which
final details could be added in order to transform this generic battle into either an
Amazonomachy or a Roman battle scene.

133

ASR II, pp. 75-137; ASR XII.1, pp. 129-191; LIMC I.1, pp. 586-653; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, pp. 138-141,
pls. 146-149. Amazons in Classical Greek art are discussed in Bothmer 1957. Amazons more broadly are discussed
in Appelt 2009, Koch 2010, Mayor 2014, and Russenberger 2015.
134
The most famous example is on the Parthenon metopes, which show all four of these battle types. See Brommer
1979, pp. 20-32; Fullerton 2000, pp. 53-78; Schwab 2005, pp. 159-198 (with most complete bibliography). For the
inspiration of the Amazonomachy in particular, we may also turn to the shield of the Athena Parthenos statue; see
Harrison 1981, pp. 281-317.
135
Brilliant 1974, p. 107.

83

Amazonomachies
Consider two sarcophagi featuring Amazonomachies, one of which is currently held in
the Vatican Museum136 and the second in Mantua [figs. 63-64].137 Each features a dramatic battle
between the Greeks and the Amazons. On the Vatican example, warriors raise their arms to
strike, fall from their horses, and lie crumpled upon the ground. To the right, a lunging man
holds the hair of the Amazon kneeling before him. In the center of the scene, a warrior has fallen
from his horse, his back turned to the viewer and his right leg still wrapped around his horse’s
body. Such figures are identical to those seen on the battle sarcophagi. Bodies fall upside down
and sideways, and figures face every direction to aim at their foes. On the example from Mantua,
the scene similarly features falling and broken bodies, flying cloaks, and striking arms. Horses
rear back as their riders are attacked. In this case, the figures are all rendered on the same scale,
creating a chaotic scene in which every empty space is filled with another arm, another horse, or
another cloak. These sarcophagi are strikingly similar to the battle scenes depicted on the battle
sarcophagus collection. The only defining feature that sets them as Amazonomachies as opposed
to more generic or Roman battles is the presence of breasts on half of the warriors.
Dagmar Grassinger examined the Amazonomachies on sarcophagi and identified various
figural types used.138 Grassinger’s Group F features an Amazon on horseback galloping to the
right [fig. 65]. The Amazon raises her sword and twists back to face the nude Greek who stands
behind her, his shield raised in defense. This twisting rider resembles many Roman cavalrymen
from the battle sarcophagi, who twist around in their seats, identified in Chapter 5 as the Roman

136

Ca. 180 CE. Vatican, Cortile del Belvedere inv. 896; ASR XII.1, p. 240, cat. 101, pls. 97-99 (with bibliography).
End of the 2nd century CE. Mantua, Palazzo Ducale; ASR XII.1, p. 242, cat. 103, pls. 100-101 (with
bibliography).
138
Grassinger 1999 (ASR XII.1), pp. 140-141.
137

84

Horseman A type. Grassinger’s Group G also features a twisting Amazon on horseback, this time
preparing to strike a Greek who wears a tunic that has fallen from one of his shoulders as he falls
off the side of his horse, raising his left arm and right leg towards the creature [fig. 66]. This
Amazon is again similar to Roman Horseman A on the battle sarcophagi, and the falling Greek is
similar to Falling Barbarian B. These two figures make up the Two Riders Group on the Badia di
Farfa sarcophagus (8), which features a figural group that is almost identical to the Amazon
Group G. Two other figures are identified by Grassinger as Group H2, consisting of an Amazon
on horseback, raising her sword arm and looking down upon a nude Greek, who turns so that his
back is towards the viewer, stretching to fill the height of the scene [fig. 67]. This Greek is
identical to the Turning Barbarian type from the battle sarcophagi. This similarity is further
solidified by the Amazon on horseback, who is positioned in the same way as the Central
Commander B type. The combination of the Turning Barbarian and the Central Commander is
repeated on many of the battle sarcophagi. A similar pairing is identified by Grassinger as Group
E [fig. 68]. Grassinger’s Groups N and O both feature a horse who is falling head first to the
ground, in a position reminiscent of the Collapsing Horse [fig. 69]. Perhaps most striking is the
frequency of what appears to be the same composition as the Execution Group, identified on the
Amazonomachies as Group B [fig. 70]. In the case of the Amazonomachies, it is an Amazon
who kneels on the ground, her hair held by a Greek soldier. Many of the fallen figural types,
Grassinger’s Gefallene P, Q, R, S, W, and X, are identical to the various dying barbarians that
line the bottoms of the battle sarcophagi [figs. 71-72]. Finally, the Trumpeter has been identified
on a few Amazon sarcophagi, Grassinger’s Tubicen Y, a tunic-wearing Greek who holds his
trumpet in one hand and places his other hand on his helmet, a pose identical to the Trumpeters
found on the battle sarcophagi [fig. 73].

85

Many of these figural types have already been shown in Chapter 3 to be directly inspired
by the Roman copies of Pergamene statues of Gauls. This is especially true for the falling and
fallen bodies that occupy the lower parts of the sarcophagus battle scenes. A Roman statue of an
Amazon, which features an Amazon who slumps backwards off of her horse as it rears back,
reinforces this connection between these figures on sarcophagi and statues.139 This simple
representation is found on many Amazonomachy sarcophagi of this period, usually with a Greek
pulling the Amazon off her horse by her hair.140
As shown in Chapter 5, many of the battle sarcophagi are framed on either side by
tropaea or winged Victories. On the other hand, only a few of the Amazon sarcophagi are
framed. One Amazon sarcophagus at the Capitoline Museum in Rome is framed by a winged
Victory on the left and a standing woman with an exposed breast holding a tropaeum on the right
[fig. 74].141 This second woman is positioned identically to the framing Victories on the Via
Tiburtina sarcophagus (4). On the other hand, the Badia di Farfa battle sarcophagus (8) is not
framed. This is a particularly interesting case, as a few of the figures on this particular
sarcophagus are types more frequently found in the Amazonomachies.142 For example, the
barbarian who has fallen off the side of his horse, Falling Barbarian B, is quite common on the
Amazon sarcophagi.143 This sarcophagus also lacks any central commander figure. The
prominence of the falling barbarian and the lack of framing and a central figure on the Badia di
Farfa sarcophagus (8) suggest that this scene may have been roughed out at a workshop with the

139

Farnese Collection inv. 6405; Giuliano 1979, pp. 162-165, n. 111 (with bibliography); Stewart 2004, p. 61, fig.
82.
140
Group A in Grassinger 1999.
141
Ca. 170 CE. Museo Capitolino Inv. 726. Krierer 1995, p. 40, pls. 5-6; ASR XII.1, p. 237, cat. 94, pls. 91-93 (with
bibliography).
142
The similarities between the Badia di Farfa (8) and Badia di Cava (9) battle sarcophagi are recognized by
Russenberger (2015, pp. 332-336).
143
Group G in Grassinger 1999.

86

intention of adding the details of an Amazonomachy, only to have a customer choose to instead
have a Roman and barbarian battle. The figures used on the Badia di Cava sarcophagus (9) are
similar to those on the Badia di Farfa (8). Here the scene is framed only by standing nude men.
The Falling Barbarian B type is prominently featured in the center of the scene. On the far left of
the scene, a man in uniform sits on the ground about to be struck by the nude soldier who stands
above him. The man on the ground recalls the Cowering Barbarian figural type, but he is in full
Roman uniform. Again, this may be an example of a sarcophagus that had been roughed out with
the intention of becoming an Amazonomachy. That would explain why a body in uniform is here
shown upon the ground, something that is almost never shown on the Roman battle sarcophagi.
It was more practical for the sculptor to turn this figure, which was intended to be an Amazon in
a tunic, into a Roman in full uniform than it would have been to transform this figure into a nude
barbarian.
What this analysis of the compositional groupings on the Amazonomachy sarcophagi
reveals is that these scenes were using the same figural types as the Roman battle sarcophagi.
Accordingly, it has been suggested that the Amazon sarcophagi were the inspiration for the
Roman battle sarcophagi.144 Because the Amazonomachy has a much longer history of
representation than do the non-mythological battle scenes of the battle sarcophagi, it is therefore
more likely that the Amazon battles would inspire the barbarian battles rather than the other way
around.145 Amazon sarcophagi, however, are roughly contemporary with the Roman battle
sarcophagi. This chronology is extremely problematic, as it is almost entirely based on stylistic
comparisons between various sarcophagi and the imperial art from the period, but nevertheless

144
145

Brilliant 1974, p. 107.
See the full list in LIMC I.1, pp. 586-653.

87

there is no clear evidence to suggest that the Amazonomachy sarcophagi were popular before the
battle sarcophagi. The two scenes are contemporary.
Adding to the contemporaneity of the two types of sarcophagus scenes, a consideration of
prior representations of Amazomachies reveals that their form on the sarcophagi is quite
different from anything that comes before. Firstly, Amazonomachies, especially in Roman art,
tend to be focused on a specific Amazon myth, such as Achilles and Penthesilea, Herakles and
Hippolyta, or Theseus and Antiope.146 More generalized Amazon battles exist, though they are
less popular; however, generalized Amazonomachies were rather popular in Greek art, including
depictions on various vase paintings and architectural sculptures, such as on the Temple of
Apollo at Bassae [fig. 75].147 In these Amazonomachies, the figures are almost entirely frontal
and paratactic, creating a much different composition than what is seen on the chaotic and overly
crowded Amazon sarcophagi.148 Greek Amazonomachies do not account for the stylistic trends
that occur on the Amazon sarcophagi.
It is possible that the sculptors of these Amazonomachies were similarly using the
various statuary prototypes that were identified on the battle sarcophagi, including Roman copies
of the Attalid Gauls and the various Roman Amazon statues. This would explain the use of
almost identical compositional groupings between the two types of battles. The conglomeration
of a variety of statuary types to create a cohesive scene may have simply been the standard
practice for the representation of battles on sarcophagi during this period, following the trend

146

This is apparent when one examines Zanker and Ewald’s 2004 book, Living with Myths. Amazonomachies are
only discussed within the context of the Achilles and Penthesilea myth, despite the preponderance of more generic
Amazonomachies on Antonine sarcophagi. Few studies have been done on the generic Amazon battle scenes.
147
Bothmer 1957. For the Temple of Apollo at Bassae, see Mallwitz 1975, pp. 70-90; Arapoyianni 2007 (with a full
bibliography).
148
Hamberg (1945, pp. 186-189) discusses the similarities between the Amazon and battle sarcophagi that
distinguish the Amazonomachies from prior, more Classical renditions.

88

seen on imperial art away from separated fighting masses and towards a greater emphasis on
one-on-one combats. It can be assumed that such scenes could have been crafted at the same
workshops by the same sculptors.149
Sculpting Workshops
As noted above in Chapter 6, evidence from the Centrale Montemartini boar-hunt
sarcophagus suggests that the carving of a sarcophagus scene was a gradual process.150 The
sculptor did not simply carve the entire scene at once, but instead roughed out the decoration and
gradually added the finer details. This sculpting procedure allowed a workshop to hold a stock of
roughed-out chests, rather than entirely completed chests, which could more easily be sold.
These partially sculpted sarcophagi could have been completed according to the desires of a
customer, allowing for a faster purchasing process, and at the same time reducing the risk for the
workshop that was inherent in maintaining completed stock. Completed sarcophagi may never
have been purchased, but partially sculpted sarcophagi, which could have been altered, were
more likely to have been purchased. The workshops could have achieved a careful balance
between sarcophagi that could be quickly acquired and sarcophagi that fit the customer’s
needs.151
Sometimes, the initial intent of the roughed out scene might have been altered according
to the needs of the customer, as evidenced by the sarcophagus from Campania that represents a
reclining Endymion, surrounded by Cupids [fig. 77].152 Upon closer examination, it is quite clear

149

This is similar to the argument that sarcophagus sculptors were used to carve the Column of Marcus Aurelius, as
discussed in Beckmann 2011, pp. 173-181.
150
Bertoletti, Cima, and Talamo 2006, inv. 837; Rockwell 1993, pp. 109-110; Russell 2013, pp. 286-287.
151
As it is put by Russell (2013, p. 295), “the more defined the product, the more reduced the potential marketplace
for it.”
152
Elsner 1998, pp. 152-153.

89

that the main figure originally had breasts and female genitalia and was intended to represent
Ariadne. It is likely that the sarcophagus was available and ready to be sold but was altered at the
request of the purchaser, who wanted a male to be featured instead. In the case of the
Amazonomachy and battle sarcophagi, we can imagine a similar model, whereby the workshop
roughly carved a generic battle scene, and the purchaser could then request that some of the
figures be altered to resemble either Amazons or barbarians. Perhaps Roman battles were
preferred for male burials and Amazonomachies for female burials.153
One difficulty with this interpretation is the fact that barbarians on Roman battle
sarcophagi are often nude, while Amazons are always shown wearing a belted chiton. Because of
this, it would not be plausible that these two enemies were easily interchangeable. However, a
careful consideration of the figural groups reveals that it was often the Roman soldiers who were
interchangeable with the Amazons. Consider Grassinger’s Groups F, G, and H2 cited above.
Each of these figural types on the Amazonomachies feature an Amazon on horseback, attacking
a nude Greek. These same groupings on the battle sarcophagi consist of a Roman horseman, such
as the Roman Horseman A or the various Central Commander types, attacking a nude barbarian.
The barbarian and Greek would thus be easily interchangeable, as little to no wardrobe change
would be necessary. Similarly, the Roman and Amazon could be interchanged with relative ease:
the Roman wears a tunic and the Amazon a belted chiton, each of which falls to the mid-thigh
creating a sort of skirt. The sculptor would simply need to apply specific details to distinguish
between the two, either a muscle cuirass for a Roman or an exposed breast for an Amazon.
Adding to this connection, many of the Amazons on Roman Amazon sarcophagi wear helmets,

153

Russenberger (2015) argued that Amazonomachy sarcophagi were intended to represent female virtues and were
therefore used for female burials.

90

similar to those that the Roman soldiers wear.154 This pattern of Romans and Amazons being
interchangeable has its exceptions. The best example is the Execution Group, or Grassinger’s
Group B; in the case of the battle sarcophagi, it is a barbarian who is killed, and in the case of the
Amazonomachy, it is an Amazon.
This association between the Amazonian warriors and the Roman soldiers has interesting
implications. It would, of course, be extremely un-Roman to imply that Romans are comparable
to women.155 Indeed, the Amazons, though a fair match to their Greek opponents, are intended to
represent the enemy in the Amazonomachy. Two potential explanations arise. The first is purely
pragmatic: Amazons and Romans both wear skirts and ride horses, Greeks and barbarians are
both (mostly) nude and fight on foot. If generic battle scenes were roughed out, to which detail
could later be applied, it would be logical to allow for as much overlap between the two potential
final products as possible. The interchangeability between the Roman and Amazonian figures
was purely practical and had no further implications.
That being said, it is also worth considering that this association may have had some
deeper connotations. The final products of either a battle or Amazonomachy sarcophagus would
have been noticeably similar, with the Romans taking many of the same fighting stances as the
Amazons. To solidify this potential connection, I turn to the statue featuring an Amazon fighting
Gaul, as mentioned in Chapter 3.156 The Gaul is an exclusively Roman enemy during the 2nd
century CE, and to see an Amazon taking the place of a Roman soldier must have been striking.

154

It is important to note that these connections apply to Amazon sarcophagi found and likely produced in Italy.
Other similarities between Attic Amazon sarcophagi and Attic battle sarcophagi also exist, but this goes beyond the
scope of this particular paper.
155
As stated by Inge Hansen: “women may be ennobled by reference to male characteristics, but a woman behaving
like a man is a monster who overturns social order and stability” (Hansen 2003, p. 108).
156
Museo Nazionale Romano inv. 124678; Krierer 1995, pp. 113-114, pl. 58, n. 201; Stewart 2004, p. 67, fig. 85
(with most up to date bibliography).

91

The Romans did occasionally identify themselves with the east, particularly through their Trojan
lineage.157 Roma herself is usually personified as an Amazonian warrior. Nevertheless, further
study would be required before making any claims about the connections between the Romans
and the Amazons.
Another possible explanation requires a reexamination of the meaning behind
Amazonomachies on sarcophagi. While most scholars agree that the Amazonomachy is a
metaphorical representation of Roman male virtus, Christian Russenberger has recently
questioned this assessment.158 Russenberger noticed a pattern of using this scene type on
sarcophagi that held females. The Amazonomachy would therefore not represent male virtus, but
instead the tragedy of female death. According to Russenberger’s interpretation, the gruesome
aspects of war that are underlined by the chaotic nature of the Amazon scenes and that focus
upon the defeated enemy serve to symbolize the tragedy of death more broadly. The viewer is
not expected to identify with either the Greeks or Amazons, but to recognize the more difficult
aspects of war. With this interpretation, the use of Amazonomachies is rather similar to the battle
sarcophagi, which emphasize the drama of war through the prominence of the dead and dying
barbarians.
This pattern of roughing out battle scenes for the later application of detail does not apply
to all Amazonomachy and battle sarcophagi. Many Amazonomachies, such as the sarcophagus at
the Vatican [fig. 78], prominently feature the myth of Achilles and Penthesilea.159 Most of the
figures in this scene follow the same patterns described above, but two figures are featured in the
center: Achilles holds the collapsing body of Penthesilea, rendered on a larger scale and standing

157

Rose 2014, pp. 222-240.
Russenberger 2015.
159
Grassinger 1999, ASR XII.1, cat. no. 127, pl. 111.3.
158

92

apart from the action. Similarly, the central commander figure on many of the battle sarcophagi
stands out as a feature unique to the battle scenes. However, the Achilles and Penthesilea scene
does not become prominent until the early 3rd century CE.160 This is around the same period
when the Roman battle sarcophagi begin to abandon the confined set of figural groupings in
favor of the far more complex and chaotic scenes, in which every single barbarian is shown
clothed and all of the figures are rendered on a smaller scale, as on the Villa Borghese (13) and
Portonaccio (16) sarcophagi. These scenes seem to move away from the stylistic conventions of
the earlier battle sarcophagi in order to create scenes that are even more realistic and dramatic.
Thus there is a point around the turn of the century during which the Amazon and battle
sarcophagi branch off into two rather distinct compositional types. The battles are no longer
closely related, and it is no longer possible to see one as a direct inspiration for the other. The
Central Commander figure on the battle sarcophagi begins to be emphasized in a more dramatic
way, which shifts the mood of the battle scenes away from the tragedy of the dying enemy and
towards the victory of the Romans over this enemy. This also corresponds with the quickly
diminishing popularity of the battle scenes on sarcophagi, as scenes of battles became exclusive
to imperial art.161 Because the battle sarcophagi were no longer as popular, the few later
examples, such as the Ludovisi sarcophagus, were the result of private commission. This
explains why the Amazonomachies and battle sarcophagi were no longer similar in composition:
workshops would no longer have had a market for battle sarcophagi, and would thus have been
safe to simply produce Amazonomachies.
Conclusion

160

This trend towards featuring the main figures of a myth at the center of the composition was noted by Borg 2013,
pp. 164-177.
161
Discussed in Hölscher 2003.

93

Amazonomachies on Roman sarcophagi are composed of many of the same figural types
and groups found on the Roman battle sarcophagi. The similarities between these two
sarcophagus types suggest that they may have been produced by the same workshops. Because
the sculpting process allowed workshops to rough out sarcophagus decoration, to which later
detail may have been applied, the similarities between the Amazonomachy and battle sarcophagi
suggest that the two scenes were originally interchangeable. A workshop could rough out a
generic battle scene, to which final details would have been added according to the desires of the
customer, changing the scene into either a battle between Greeks and Amazons or Romans and
barbarians. Both the Amazonomachy and battle sarcophagi may have appealed to the Roman
audience for similar reasons. While the battle sarcophagi showed realistic and historical battles to
represent Roman victory, the scenes were focused upon the virtue of the Roman soldiers and
their glorious ability to vanquish a worthy foe. Similarly, the Amazonomachy sarcophagi may
have represented victory over a vicious foe, emphasizing the virtues of the victor.162 This
suggests that their messages were almost as interchangeable as their compositions; the customer
simply had to choose between mythology and history.

162

Russenberger (2015, pp. 456-460) instead argued that, while Antonine representations of the myth of the
Amazons may have been intended to emphasize these virtues, 3 rd century CE Amazonomachies, with their increased
focus on the emotional aspects of death, instead represented the paradigm of female death.

94

Chapter 8: Conclusions
Contextualizing the Roman battle sarcophagi requires a thorough examination of their
stylistic and compositional trends, as they lack findspots. This paper has sought to illuminate the
position of these sarcophagi within broader changes of artistic style, ideology, and production.
A number of earlier works inspired the Roman battle sarcophagi, but the stylistic
tendencies first presented by the various arts of the Pergamenes were particularly influential. The
Hellenistic baroque style featured on the Altar of Zeus at Pergamon laid the foundation for the
depiction of extreme emotion in battle scenes. The twisted and contorted bodies of the various
Attalid dedications were widely copied by the Romans, and these statuary types inspired the
dramatic body positions of the figures on the sarcophagi, which turn through space and invite the
viewer to imagine their full three-dimensional form. It is as though the sculptors simply
assembled these Attalid-inspired sculptures to create their comprehensive scenes. While Roman
triumphal paintings have long been considered to be a major inspiration for the battle sarcophagi,
the prominence of landscapes in Roman paintings and the lack of landscapes on the battle
sarcophagi suggest that the inspiration must lie elsewhere. Additionally, new evidence that
reconstructs these so-called triumphal paintings as stages carrying statues reaffirms that the
sarcophagi were inspired instead by sculptures.
Stylistically, the battle sarcophagi also reflect a number of major innovations occurring in
imperial art from the time of Trajan to the time of Septimius Severus. The separation of the
emperor from the action of a battle, in a triumphal pose upon his horse, became a major trope on
the sarcophagi, especially on the later examples. The use of multiple ground lines as on the
Column of Marcus Aurelius and the Arch of Septimius Severus was incorporated onto the
sarcophagi to create densely packed compositions with figures reaching and falling across the
95

entire height of the scene. While imperial art only experimented with a shift away from blocky
divisions of space towards more complex patterns of one-on-one combats, the battle sarcophagi
presented scenes that jumbled these single combats to create chaotic depictions of battles.
Specific figural types and groups can be identified on all of the battle sarcophagi. These
types are arranged in various ways, suggesting that there was no single model for their creation.
Instead, a wide range of individual types could be assembled by sculptors to achieve a desired
effect. However, four sarcophagi stand out because their compositions not only used the same
figures, but also arranged these figures in a similar way. It is therefore plausible that this
Ammendola Group was carved at a single workshop. The rest of the battle sarcophagi, however,
show such a wide range of compositions that it is likely they were all produced at separate,
smaller scale workshops. The battle sarcophagi therefore support a heterogeneous model for the
sarcophagus industry, which allowed for both small scale workshops working under commission
and larger workshops capable of producing some stock of sarcophagi.
By comparing the compositions on the battle sarcophagi and Amazonomachy sarcophagi, it
is apparent that the compositions of the two are similar. The scenes on the Amazonomachy
sarcophagi feature many of the same figural types and groups that are found on the battle
sarcophagi. Iconographically, the two types of battles are interchangeable, apart from the dress of
the figures. The similarities between the compositions of the Amazonomachy and battle
sarcophagi suggest that some workshops would have had mostly completed sarcophagi on hand,
which could be further refined according to the desires of the purchaser. The ability for
workshops to have almost completed works available for purchase would have sped up the
purchasing process, while the ability to refine the scenes on these sarcophagi according to the
desires of the consumer would have given the workshops greater security.
96

This thesis has shown that compositional analysis can be an effective tool for
understanding production. Studying the battle sarcophagi in isolation from the full range of
sarcophagi allows for a more in depth understanding of their compositions. Without this close
examination, it would not be possible to draw conclusions about their workshops. While a
similar composition-based study could be applied to other sarcophagi, it would be necessary to
first examine sarcophagi that show the same types of scenes in order to look for repeated figural
types, as I have done by examining the battle sarcophagi separately from the Amazonomachy
sarcophagi. I do not, however, believe that other sarcophagus scenes would lend themselves to
the same patterns seen here with the battle and Amazonomachy sarcophagi. These two scenes
could be carved interchangeably at workshops because of the similarities of their representations:
they both show battles that feature unnamed figures. The majority of other figural sarcophagi
show mythological or biographical scenes that cannot be made generic because they represent
specific figures and events.
Nevertheless, it would be beneficial to conduct a study of the Roman battle sarcophagi
alongside the Attic battle sarcophagi. Though some similarities exist between the two, the Attic
sarcophagi are generally more paratactic and rigid. It may be possible to identify specific figural
types and groups on these Attic battle sarcophagi, and perhaps sculptural parallels for these
types. There is also excellent evidence for the similarities between the Attic battle sarcophagi
and Attic Amazonomachy sarcophagi, as was mentioned briefly by Roman Redlich in his
dissertation on Amazon sarcophagi.163 Much could be learned by studying these parallels
alongside the Roman examples discussed here. By considering the compositions of the Attic
battle sarcophagi and their relationship with Attic Amazon sarcophagi, it may be possible to find

163

Redlich 1942.

97

similar conclusions about the sarcophagus industry and sculptural workshops. If these parallels
between the Attic battle and Amazon sarcophagi are similar to those found between the Roman
battle and Amazon sarcophagi, this would reaffirm the conclusions made by this thesis.

98

Bibliography
ASR = Die antiken Sarkophagreliefs
Agnoli, N. 2002. Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Palestrina: le sculture. Rome.
Alexandrescu, C. 2010. Blasmusiker und Standartenträger im römischen Heer: Untersuchungen
zur Benennung, Funktion und Ikonographie, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Amedick, R. 1991. Die Sarkophage mit Darstellungen aus dem Menschenleben (ASR 14), Berlin.
Amedick, R. 2007. “Etruskische Sepulkralkunst und römische Sarkophage,” in SarkophagStudien III, ed. G. Koch, Mainz, pp. 1-11.
Andreae, B. 1956. Motivgeschichtliche Untersuchungen zu den römischen Schlachtsarkophagen,
Berlin.
Andreae, B. 1968. “Zur Komposition des großen Ludovisischen Schlachtsarkophages,” in
Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Universität Rostock, Rostock, pp. 633-640.
Andreae, B. 1969. “Imitazione ed originalita nei sarcofagi Romani,” RendAccIt 41, pp. 145-166.
Andreae, B. 1977. The Art of Rome, trans. R. Wolf, New York.
Andreae, B. 1992. “Vom Pergamonaltar bis Raffael: Vorbilder, Eingenart, und Wirkung der
römischen Sarkophage,” AW 23, pp. 41-46.
Appelt, H. 2009. Die Amazonen: Töchter von Liebe und Krieg, Stuttgart.
Arapoyianni, X. 2007. The Temple of Apollo Epikourios at Bassae, trans. A. Farrington, Athens.
Arias, P., E. Cristiani, and E. Gabba. 1977. Camposanto monumentale di Pisa: la antichita, Pisa.
Ashmole, B. 1929. A Catalogue of the Ancient Marbles at Ince Blundell Hall, Oxford.
Aurigemma, S. 1954. Terme de Diocleziano e il Museo Nazionale Romano, Rome.
Aurigemma, S. 1963. Le Terme di Diocleziano e il Museo Nazionale Romano 5, Rome.
Aurigemma, S. 1970. Die Diokletiansthermen und das Museo Nazionale Romano, Rome.

99

Austin, N. and N. Rankov. 1995. Exploratio: Military and Political Intelligence in the Roman
World, London.
Bandinelli, R. 1970. Rome, The Centre of Power: Roman Art to AD 200, trans. P. Green,
London.
Bartman, E. 1993. “Carving the Badminton Sarcophagus,” MMAJ 28, pp. 57-75.
Baumer, L., T. Hölscher, and L. Winkler. 1991. “Narrative Systematik in den Reliefs der
Traianssäule: Drei Fallstudien,” JdI 106, pp. 261-295.
Beard, M. 2007. The Roman Triumph, Cambridge, Mass.
Beckmann, M. 2011. The Column of Marcus Aurelius: The Genesis and Meaning of a Roman
Imperial Monument, Chapel Hill.
Bellido, A. 1949. Esculturas Romanas de España y Portugal, Madrid.
Bertoletti, M., M. Cima, and E. Talamo. 2006. Centrale Montemartini: Museo Capitolini, Milan.
Bie, O. 1891. Kampfgruppe und Kämpfertypen in der Antike, Berlin.
Bielfeldt, R. 2005. Orestes auf römischen Sarkophagen, Berlin.
Bieńkowski, P. 1908. Die Darstellungen der Gallier der hellenistischen Kunst, Vienna.
Birk, S. 2012. “Carving Sarcophagi: Roman Sculptural Workshops and their Organization,”
in Ateliers and Artisans in Roman Art and Archaeology (JRA Supplementary Series
92), ed. T. Kristensen and B. Poulsen, pp. 13–37.
Birk, S. 2013. Depicting the Dead: Self-Representation and Commemoration on Roman
Sarcophagi with Portraits (Aarhus Studies in Mediterranean Antiquity XI), Aarhus.
Bonfante, L. 2011. The Barbarians of Ancient Europe: Realities and Interactions, Cambridge.

100

Borg, B. 2013. Crisis and Ambition: Tombs and Burial Customs in Third Century CE Rome,
Oxford.
Bothmer, D. 1957. Amazons in Greek Art, Oxford.
Brandenburg, H. 1978. “Der Beginn der stadtrömischen Sarkophag-Produktion der Kaiserzeit,”
JdI 93, pp. 277-327.
Brilliant, R. 1963. Gesture and Rank in Roman Art, New Haven, Conn.
Brilliant, R. 1967. The Arch of Septimius Severus in the Roman Forum (MAAR XXIX), Rome.
Brilliant, R. 1974. Roman Art from the Republic to Constantine, London.
Brilliant, R. 1984. Visual Narratives: Storytelling in Etruscan and Roman Art, Ithaca, N.Y.
Brilliant, R. 2000. “The Pax Romana: Bridge or Barrier between Romans and Barbarians,” in
Gegenwelten zu den Kulturen Griechenlands und Roms in der Antike, ed. T. Hölscher,
Leipzig, pp. 391-408.
Cain, H. and S. Rieckhoff. 2002. Die Religion der Kelten, Mainz.
Calza, R. 1977. Antichità di Villa Doria Pamphilj, Rome.
Campelli, V. 1936. “Sarcofago del Museo Mussolini con scene di battaglia,” BullCom 63, pp.
81-92.
Candilio, D. 2001. “Il restauro dei rilievi Giustiniani,” in I Giustiniani e l'antico: Palazzo
Fontana di Trevi, Roma 26 ottobre 2001-27 gennaio 2002, ed. G. Fusconi, Rome, pp.
481-488.
Cichorius, C. 1927. Die Reliefs der Traianssäule, Berlin.
Ciliberto, F. 2007. “Die Sarkophage der Region von Friuli-Venezia Giulia,” in SarkophagStudien III, ed. G. Koch, Mainz, pp. 159-163.

101

Claveria, M. 1998. “Roman Sarcophagi in Tarragona,” in Sarkophag-Studien I, ed. G. Koch,
Mainz, pp. 138-149.
Coarelli, F. 2000. The Column of Trajan, trans. C. Rockwell, Rome.
Coarelli, F. 2008. La Colonna di Marco Aurelio, trans. H. Patterson, Rome.
Cohen, A. 1997. The Alexander Mosaic: Stories of Victory and Defeat, Cambridge.
Cossiga, F. (ed). 1984. Palazzo Cenci: Palazzo Giustiniani, Rome.
Curtius, L. 1939. “Neue Denkmäler antiker Kunst,” RM 54, pp. 220-243.
Dallas Museum of Art = Dallas Museum of Art. A Guide to the Collection, Dallas 2012.
De Angelis D’Ossat, M., ed. 2002. Scultura antica in Palazzo Altemps: Museo Nazionale
Romano, Milan.
De Angelis D’Ossat, M., ed. 2011. Palazzo Altemps: le collezioni, Milan.
De Lachenal, L. 1983. "Sarcofago colossale con battaglia fra Romani e barbari," in Museo
Nazionale Romano 1.5.1: I Marmi Ludovisi nel Museo Nazionale Romano, ed. B. Palma,
Rome, pp. 56-67.
Dillon, S. 2006. “Women on the Columns of Trajan and Marcus Aurelius and the Visual
Language of Roman Victory,” in Representations of War in Ancient Rome, ed. S. Dillon
and K. Welch, Cambridge, pp. 244-271.
Dowling, M. 2006. Clemency and Cruelty in the Roman World, Ann Arbor, Mich.
Eliopoulos, T. 2009. The Kerameikos Archaeological Museum, Athens.
Ellis, A. 1950. Rev. of R. Redlich, Die Amazonensarkophage des 2. und 3. Jahrhunderts N. Chr.,
in AJA 54, pp. 287-288.
Elsner, K. 1995. Art and the Roman Viewer: The Transformation of Art from the Pagan World to
Christianity, Cambridge.

102

Elsner, J. 1998. The Imperial Rome and Christian Triumph: The Art of the Roman Empire AD
100-450, Oxford.
Elsner, J. and J. Huskinson, eds. 2011. Life, Death, and Representation: Some New Work on
Roman Sarcophagi, Berlin.
Ewald, B. and C. Noreña. 2010. The Emperor and Rome: Space, Representation, and Ritual
(YCS XXXV), Cambridge.
Fant, J. 1988. “The Roman Emperors in the Marble Business: Capitalists, Middlemen or
Philanthropists?” in Classical Marble: Geochemistry, Technology, Trade (NATO ASI
Series 153), ed. N. Herz and M Waelkens, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
Faust, S. 2012. Schlachtenbilder der römischen Kaiserzeit: erzählerische Darstellungskonzepte
in der Reliefkunst von Traian bis Septimius Severus, Rahden.
Ferris, I. 2000. Enemies of Rome: Barbarians through Roman Eyes, Gloucestershire.
Ferris, I. 2009. Hate and War: The Column of Marcus Aurelius, Gloucestershire.
Ferris, I. 2013. The Arch of Constantine, Amberley.
Fittschen, K. 1979. “Sarkophage römischer Kaiser oder vom Nutzen der Porträtforschung,” JdI
94, pp. 578-593.
Francis, J. 2000. “A Roman Battle Sarcophagus at Concordia University, Montreal,” Phoenix
54.3/4, pp. 332-337.
Frothingham, A. “The Ludovisi Sarcophagus and the Dating of Roman Sarcofagi,” AJA 26, pp.
78-79.
Fullerton, M. 2000. Greek Art, Cambridge.
Gabelmann, H. 1996. “Pantherfellschabracken.” BJb 196, pp. 9-39.
Gasparri, C., ed. 2009. Le sculture Farnese I, Milan.

103

Gasparri, C. and R. Paris. 2013. Palazzo Massimo alle Terme: le collezioni, Milan.
Giuliano, A. 1955. Arco di Constantino, Rome. Non vidi.
Giuliano, A. 1979. Museo Nazionale Romano: le sculture I.1, Rome.
Giuliano, A. 1983. Museo Nazionale Romano: le sculture. I Marmi Ludovisi nel Museo
Nazionale Romano I.5, Rome.
Giuliano, A. 1985. Museo Nazionale Romano: le sculture I.8, Rome, pp. 177-188. Non vidi.
Giustiniani, V. 1640. Galleria Giustiniana II, Rome.
Grant, M. 1994. The Antonines: The Roman Empire in Transition, London.
Grassinger, D. 1999. Die Mythologischen Sarkophage (ASR XII.1), Berlin.
Griebel, J. 2013. Der Kaiser im Krieg: Die Bilder der Säule des Marc Aurel, Berlin.
Guerrini, L. 1972. Sculture di Palazzo Mattei, Rome.
Hallett, C. 2005. The Roman Nude: Heroic Portrait Statuary 200 BC-AD 300, Oxford.
Hamberg, P. 1936. “Zur Bewaffnung und Kampfesart der Germanen,” ActaArch 7, pp. 21-49.
Hamberg, P. 1945. Studies in Roman Imperial Art, with Special Reference to the State Reliefs of
the Second Century, Copenhagen.
Hanfmann, G. 1964. Roman Art: A Modern Survey of the Art of Imperial Rome, Greenwich,
Conn.
Hannestad, N. 1986. Roman Art and Imperial Policy, Aarhus.
Hansen, I. 2003. “Gendered Identities and the Conformity of Male-Female Virtues on Roman
Mythological Sarcophagi,” in Public Roles and Personal Status. Men and Women in
Antiquity. Proceedings of the Third Nordic Symposium on Gender and Women’s History
in Antiquity, ed. L. Lovén and A. Strömberg, pp. 107-121.
Hardwick, L. 1990. “Ancient Amazons: Heroes, Outsiders, or Women?” GaR 37.1, pp. 14-36.

104

Harrison, E. 1981. “Motifs of the City-Siege on the Shield of Athena Parthenos,” AJA 85.3, pp.
281-317.
Heckel, W. 2006. “Mazaeus, Callisthenes, and the Alexander Sarcophagus,” Historia 55.4, pp.
385-396.
Heilmeyer, W. 2004. “Ancient Workshops and Ancient Art,” OJA 23.4, pp. 403-415.
Heitz, C. 2009. Die Guten, die Bösen und die Hasslichen: nördliche "Barbaren" in der
römischen Bildkunst, Hamburg.
Helbig, W. 1895. Guide to the Public Collections of Classical Antiquities in Rome I-III, trans. J.
and F. Muirhead, Leipzig.
Holliday, P. 1997. “Roman Triumphal Painting: Its Function, Development, and Reception,” The
Art Bulletin 79.1, pp. 130-147.
Hӧlscher, T., ed. 2000. Gegenwelten: zu den Kulturen Griechenlands und Roms in der Antike,
Munich.
Hӧlscher, T. 2003. “Images of War in Greece and Rome: Between Military Practice, Public
Memory, and Cultural Symbolism,” JRS 93, pp. 1-17.
Hӧlscher, T. 2004. The Language of Images in Roman Art, Cambridge.
Hӧlscher, T. 2006. “The Transformation of Victory into Power: From Event to Structure,” in
Representations of War in Ancient Rome, ed. S. Dillon and K. Welch, Cambridge, pp. 2748.
Hurwit, J. 2007. “The Problem with Dexileos: Heroic and Other Nudities in Greek Art,” AJA
111.1, pp. 35-60.
Huskinson, J. 2015. Roman Strigillated Sarcophagi: Art and Social History, Oxford.
Ippoliti, A. 2000. Il restauro di Palazzo Giustiniani, Rome. Non vidi.

105

Johannes, D. 1970. Der Alexandersarkophag und seine Werkstatt, Berlin.
Jones, S. 1912. Catalogue, Museo Capitolino, Rome.
Jung, H. 1978. “Zum Reliefstil der stadtrömischen Sarkophage des frühen 3. Jahrhunderts n.
Chr.,” JdI 93, pp. 328-368.
Jung, H. 1984. “Zur Vorgeschichte des spӓtantoninischen Stilwandels,” MarbWPr, pp. 59-104.
Kähler, H. 1958. Rom und seine Welt: Bilder zur Geschichte und Kultur, Munich.
Kampen, N. 1981. “Biographical Narration and Roman Funerary Art,” JRA 85, pp. 47-58.
Kistler, E. 2009. Funktionalisierte Keltenbilder: die Indienstnahme der Kelten zur Vermittlung
von Normen und Werten in der hellenistischen Welt, Berlin.
Kleiner, D. 1992. Roman Sculpture, Yale.
Kleiner, F. 2010. A History of Roman Art, Boston, Mass.
Koch, A. et al. 2010. Amazonen: Geheimnisvolle Kriegerinnen, Munich.
Koch, G. 1993. Sarkophage der römischen Kaiserzeit, Darmstadt.
Koch, G. and H. Sichtermann. 1975. Griechische Mythen auf römische Sarkophagen, Tübingen.
Koch, G. and H. Sichtermann. 1982. Römische Sarkophage, Munich.
Koortbojian, M. 1995. Myth, Meaning, and Memory on Roman Sarcophagi, Berkeley, Calif.
Krierer, K. 1995. Sieg und Niederlage: Untersuchungen physiognomischer und mimischer
Phänomene in Kampfdarstellungen der römischen Plastik, Vienna.
Krierer, K. 2004. Antike Germanenbilder, Vienna.
Künzl, E. 2010. Der Traum vom Imperium: Der Ludovisisarkophag—Grabmel eines Feldherrn
Roms, Regensburg/Mainz.
Landskron, A. 2005. Parther und Sasaniden: das Bild der Orientalen in der römischen
Kaiserzeit, Vienna.

106

Landskron, A. 2006. “Das ‘Partherdenkmal’ von Ephesos: Ein Monument für die Antoninen,”
ÖJh 75, pp. 143-183.
La Regina, A., ed. 1998. Palazzo Massimo Alle Terme, Milan.
Leal, E. 2010. “The Empire’s Muse: Roman Interpretations of the Amazons through Literature
and Art” (thesis San Diego State University).
Lepper, R. and S. Frere. 1988. Trajan’s Column: A new tradition of the Cichorius Plates,
Gloucester.
Ling, R. 1991. Roman Painting, Cambridge.
Lusnia, S. 2006. “Battle Imagery and Politics on the Severan Arch in the Roman Forum,” in
Representations of War in Ancient Rome, ed. S. Dillon and K. Welch, Cambridge, pp.
272-299.
Maderna-Lauter, C. 2000. “Unordnung als Bedrohung: Der Kampf der Giganten gegen die
Götter in der Bildkunst der hellenistischen und römischen Zeit,” in Gegenwelten zu den
Kulturen Griechenlands und Roms in der Antike, ed. T. Hölscher, Leipzig, pp. 435-466.
Mallwitz, A. 1975. Der Bassai-fries in der ursprünglich geplanten Anordnung, Munich.
Marszal, J. 2000. “Ubiquitous Barbarians: Representations of the Gauls at Pergamon and
Elsewhere,” in From Pergamon to Sperlonga: Sculpture and Context, ed. N. de
Grummond and B. Ridgway, Berkeley, pp. 210-234.
Matz, F. 1958. Ein römisches Meisterwerk: Der Jahreszeitensarkophag Badminton, New York.
Matz, F. and F. Duhn. 1881-1882. Antike Bildwerke in Rom I-III, Leipzig.
Mayor, A. 2014. The Amazons: Lives and Legends of Warrior Women across the Ancient World,
Princeton.
McCann, A. 1978. Roman Sarcophagi in The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.

107

Meinecke, K. “Roman Sarcophagi in their Original Context: Rome and Vicinity,” published
online at http://www.archaeologie-online.de/bibliothek/tagungsberichte/2008/cult-andimagination/roman-sarcophagi-in-their-original-context-rome-and-vicinity/seite-1/.
Meinecke, K. 2013. “Funerary Cult at Sarcophagi: Rome and Vicinity,” in Iconographie
funéraire romaine et société: corpus antique, approches nouvelles? Collection Histoire
de l’art 3, ed. M. Galinier and F. Baratte, Perpignan, pp. 31-50.
Meinecke, K. 2014. Sarcophagum Posuit: Römische Steinsarkophage im Kontext (SarkophagStudien 7), Ruhpolding.
Moreno, P. and A. Viacava. 2003. I marmi antichi della Galleria Borghese: la collezione
archeologica di Camillo e Francesco Borghese, Rome.
Morris, I. 1992. Death-Ritual and Social Structure in Classical Antiquity, Cambridge.
Moscati, S. and C. di Stefano. 2005. Palermo: Museo Archeologico, Palermo.
Müller, H. 2002. “Die Kelten aus Sicht der Anderen,” in Die Religion der Kelten, ed. H. Cain
and S. Rieckhoff, Mainz, pp. 180-200.
Musso, L. 1985. “Sarcofago da Portonaccio con raffigurazione di scontro tra romani e barbari,”
in Museo Nazionale Romano: le sculture I.8, ed. A. Giuliani, Rome, pp. 177-188.
Musso, L. 2010. “Sarcophago con Galatomachia complete di coperchio,” in Musei Capitolini: le
sculture del Palazzo Nuovo I, ed. E. La Rocca and C. Presicce, Rome, pp. 310-323.
Mustilli, D. 1939. Museo Mussolini, Rome.
Muth, S. 2005. “Im Angesicht des Todes. Zum Wertediskurs in der römische Grabkultur,” in
Römische Werte als Gegenstand der Altertumswissenschaft, ed. A. Haltenhoff, A. Heil,
and F. Mutschler, Leipzig, pp. 259-286.
Nibby, A. 1832. Monumenti scelti della Villa Borghese, Rome.

108

Ӧstenberg, I. 2009. Staging the World: Spoils, Captives, and Representations in the Roman
Triumphal Procession, Oxford.
Panofsky, E. 1964. Tomb Sculpture: Four Lectures on its Changing Aspects from Ancient Egypt
to Bernini, ed. H. Janson, New York.
Pardyová, M. 2006. “La representation de bataille sur le sarcophage de Portonaccio et sa
composition,” Eirene 42, pp. 135-151.
Paribeni, R. 1932. Le Terme di Diocleziano e il Museo Nazionale Romano, Rome.
Parker, A. 1992. Ancient Shipwrecks of the Mediterranean and the Roman Provinces (BAR-IS
580), Oxford.
Pasinli, A. 1997. The Book of the Alexander Sarcophagus, Istanbul.
Pearson, P. 1999. The Archaeology of Death and Burial, Rome.
Pelikán, O. 1965. Vom antiken Realismus zur spätantiken Expressivität, Praha.
Picard, G. 1968. Roman Painting, Milan.
Pirson, F. 2002. “Vom Kämpfen und Sterben der Kelten in der antiken Kunst,” in Die Religion
der Kelten, ed. H. Cain and S. Rieckhoff, Mainz, pp. 71-81.
Platt, V. 2012. “Framing the Dead on Roman Sarcophagi,” in RES: Anthropology and Aesthetics,
ed. J. Elsner and H. Wu, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 213-227.
Pollitt, J. 1983. The Art of Rome c. 753 B.C.- A.D. 337: Sources and Documents, Cambridge.
Pollitt, J. 1986. Art in the Hellenistic Age, Cambridge.
Prignitz, S. 2008. Der Pergamonaltar und die pergamenische Gelehrtenschule, Berlin.
Ramage, A. and N. Ramage. 2009. Roman Art: Romulus to Constantine, Upper Saddle River,
N.J.

109

Redlich, R. 1942. Die Amazonensarkophage des 2. und 3. Jahrhunderts N. Chr., Berlin. Non
vidi.
Reinach, S. 1889. “Gaulois dans l’art antique,” RA 28, pp.11-22, 187-203, 317-352.
Reinach, S. 1912. Répertoire de Reliefs: Grecs et Romains 3, Paris.
Reinsberg, C. 1995. Senatorensarkophage (RM 102), Mainz.
Reinsberg, C. 2006. Die Sarkophpage mit Darstellungen aus dem Menschenleben: Vita Romana
(ASR III.1), Berlin.
Reschke, E. 1966. Römische Sarkophagkunst zwischen Gallienus und Constatin, Berlin. Non
vidi.
Rich, J. and G. Shipley. 1993. War and Society in the Roman World, London.
Richter, G. 1970. Perspective in Greek and Roman Art, London.
Richter, G. and J. Breckenridge. 1982. “The Relation of Early Imperial Rome to Greek Art,”
ANRW II.12.1, pp. 3-23.
Rivière, Y. 2008. “I sarcophagi con scene di battaglia,” in Roma e i barbari: la nascita di un
nuovo mondo, ed. J. Aillagon, Venice, pp. 166-171.
Rivière, Y. 2008. “Il sarcofago di Portonaccio (Roma),” in Roma e i barbari: la nascita di un
nuovo mondo, ed. J. Aillagon, Venice, pp. 170-171.
Rizzo, G. 1904. “Sculture antiche del Palazzo Giustiniani,” BCom 32, pp. 62-66.
Robert, C. 1897-1919. Einzelmythen (ASR III, 1-3), Berlin.
Rocca, E. and C. Presicce, eds. 2010. Musei Capitolini: le sculture del Palazzo Nuovo, Rome.
Rockwell, P. 1993. The Art of Stoneworking: A Reference Guide, Cambridge.
Rodenwaldt, G. 1927. Die Kunst der Antike: Hellas und Rom, Berlin.
Rodenwaldt, G. 1929. “Der große Schlachtsarkophag Ludovisi,” AntDenk 4, pp. 61-68.

110

Rodenwaldt, G. 1935. Über den Stilwandel in der antoninischen Kunst, Berlin.
Rodenwaldt, G. 1936. “Art from Nero to the Antonines,” in Cambridge Ancient History XI, 1st
ed, ed. S. Book, F. Adcock, and M. Charlesworth, Cambridge, pp. 775-805.
Rose, C.B. 2014. The Archaeology of Greek and Roman Troy, Cambridge.
Rosso, E. 2008. “I barbari nell’arte romana (I-III secolo d.C.),” in Roma e i barbari: la nascita di
un nuovo mondo, ed. J. Aillagon, Venice, pp. 162-165.
Russell, B. 2011. “The Roman Sarcophagus ‘Industry’: a Reconsideration,” in Life, Death, and
Representation: Some New Work on Roman Sarcophagi, ed. J. Elsner and J. Huskinson,
Berlin, pp. 119-147.
Russell, B. 2013. The Economics of the Roman Stone Trade, Oxford.
Russenberger, C. 2015. Der Tod und die Mädchen: Amazonen auf römischen Sarkophagen,
Berlin.
Schäfer, T. 1979. “Zum Schlachtsarkophag Borghese,” MÉFRA 91.1, pp. 355-382.
Schäfer, T. 1986. “Römische Schlachtenbilder,” MM 27, pp. 3s45-364.
Schober, A. 1951. Die Kunst von Pergamon, Vienna.
Schmidt, E. 1962. Le Grand Autel de Pergame, Leipzig.
Schreiber, T. 1880. Die antiken Bildwerke der Villa Ludovisi in Rom, Leipzig.
Schwab, K. 2005. “Celebrations of Victory: The Metopes of the Parthenon,” in The Parthenon:
From Antiquity to the Present, ed. J. Neils, Cambridge, pp. 159-198.
Stewart, A. 2000. “Pergamo Ara Marmorea Magna: On the Date, Reconstruction, and Functions
of the Great Altar of Pergamon,” in From Pergamon to Sperlonga: Sculpture and
Context, ed. N. de Grummond and B. Ridgway, Berkeley, pp. 32-57.

111

Stewart, A. 2004. Attalos, Athens, and the Akropolis: The Pergamene “Little Barbarians” and
their Roman and Renaissance Legacy, Cambridge.
Stewart, P. 2008. The Social History of Roman Art, Cambridge.
Strong, E. 1926. La scultura romana: da Augusto a Costantino, trans. Giulio Giannelli, Florence.
Strong, A. 1971. Roman Sculpture from Augustus to Constantine, New York.
Strong, D. 1961. Roman Imperial Sculpture, London.
Strong, D. 1988. Roman Art, Yale.
Throckmorton, P. 1969. “Ancient Shipwreck Yields New Facts and a Strange Cargo,” National
Geographic 117, pp. 682-703.
Töpfer, K. 2011. Signa Militaria: Die römische Feldzeichen in der Republik und im Prinzipat,
Mainz.
Touati, A. 1987. The Great Trajanic Frieze: The Study of a Monument and of the Mechanisms of
Message Transmission in Roman Art (ActaRom I.45), Stockholm.
Toynbee, J. 1971. Death and Burial in the Roman World, London.
Turcan, R. 1966. Les Sarcophages romains à représentations dionysiaques, essai de chronologie
et d'histoire religieuse, Paris.
Turcan, R. 1999. Messages d'outre-tombe: l'iconographie des sarcophages romains. Paris.
Tusa, V. 1995. I Sarcofagi Romani in Sicilia (BibArch 14), Rome.
Van Voorhis, J. 2012. “The Working and Reworking of Marble Statuary at the Sculptor’s
Workshop at Aphrodisias,” in Ateliers and Artisans in Roman Art and Archaeology (JRA
Supplementary Series 92), ed. T. Kristensen and B. Poulsen, pp. 38-54.
Várhelyi, Z. 2010. The Religion of Senators in the Roman Empire: Power and the Beyond,
Cambridge.

112

Von Heintze, H. 1957. “Studien zu den Porträts des 3. Jahrhunderts n. Chr: Der Feldherr des
großen Ludovisischen Schlachtsarkophages,” RM 64, pp. 69-91.
Vulpe, R. 2002. Columna Lui Traiana. Trajan’s Column, trans. A. Cornaciu, Bucharest.
Walker, S. 1985. Memorials to the Roman Dead, London.
Walker, S. 1988. “Aspects of Roman Funerary Art,” in Image and Mystery in the Roman World,
Gloucester.
Walker, S. 1990. Catalogue of Roman Sarcophagi in the British Museum (CSIR II.2), London.
Ward-Perkins, J. 1980. “The Marble Trade and Its Organization: Evidence from Nicomedia,”
MAAR 36, pp. 325-338.
Ward-Perkins, J. and P. Throckmorton. 1965. “The San Pietro Wreck,” Archaeology 18, pp. 201209.
Wegner, M. 1939. Die Herrscherbildnisse in antoninischer Zeit: Das rӧmische Herrscherbild,
Berlin.
Welch, K. 2006. “Introduction,” in Representations of War in Ancient Rome, ed. S. Dillon and K.
Welch, Cambridge, pp. 1-26.
Wolf, S. 2001. “Der Schlachtsarkophag Ammendola: ein konventioneller wie exzeptioneller
Entwurf,” in Rom und die Provinzen: Gedenkschrift für Hanns Gabelmann, ed. G. Brands
et al., Mainz, pp. 43-49.
Wrede, H. 2001. Senatorische Sarkophage Roms, Mainz.
Zanker, P. 2000. “Die Gegenwelt der Barbaren und die Überhöhung der häuslichen Lebenswelt,”
in Gegenwelten zu den Kulturen Griechenlands und Roms in der Antike, ed. T. Hölscher,
Leipzig, pp. 409-434.
Zanker, P. 2010. Roman Art, trans. H. Heitmann-Gordon, Los Angeles.

113

Zanker, P. and B. Ewald. 2004. Living with Myths: The Imagery of Roman Sarcophagi, trans. J.
Slater, Oxford.

114

Catalogue of Roman Battle Sarcophagi
1. Ammendola Sarcophagus, fig. 45
Marble. H: 0.78 m. L: 2.11 m.
Capitoline Museum Inv. S 213
Reinach 1889, pp. 331-352; Helbig 1895, p. 304, n. 422; Bieńkowski 1908, p. 43-63, pl. 4; Jones
1912, p. 74, n. 5, pl. 14; Strong 1926, p. 296-297, pl. 62; Rodenwaldt 1927, p. 656; Rodenwaldt
1935, p. 24; Hamberg 1945, pp. 173-175, pl. 38; Andreae 1956, p. 14, n. 3, fig. 1; Fittschen
1969, p. 329, pl. 107; Bandinelli 1970, cat no. 341; Andreae 1977, p. 249, fig. 205; McCann
1978, p. 116, fig. 143; Schäfer 1979, p. 357f; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, p. 91, pl. 74; Koch
1993, p. 66-67, fig. 37; Krierer 1995, p. 87-88, cat. no. S 01, pls. 24-25; Landskron 2005, pp. 6974, pl. 8, fig. 31; Amedick 2007 pp. 1-11, pl. 8.4; Ferris 2000, pp. 109-111, fig. 55; Wolf 2001,
pp. 43-49; Pirson 2002, p. 81, fig. 10; Krierer 2004, Cat. 185, pl. 32.4; Heitz 2009, pp. 213-215;
Kistler 2009, pp. 242-244; Musso 2010, pp. 310-319; Kleiner 2010, p. 224, fig. 15-12; Faust
2012, p.177f. pl. 69-70.
Two tropaea frame the sarcophagus, and below them sit barbarian captives, each with his
hands tied behind his back and a torque around his neck. On the right of the sarcophagus, a
Roman cavalryman in full armor raises his weapon, pointing it towards a barbarian who is falling
from his horse. This man is nude, his legs still wrapped around his horse, and his back is turned
to the viewer. To the right, a Roman soldier, on horse and in full uniform, raises his right arm
high, holding a sword ready to strike. The soldier’s body is twisted in such a way that would not
in reality allow him to stay on his horse. His cape flows behind him, and his raised arm covers
his face. He looks down upon a barbarian who sits on the ground at his feet. This barbarian, who
wears a tunic, looks up at his foe and holds a sword near his chest. Behind this pair is a barbarian
horseman, with wild hair, a mustache, and a cape. Below him a horse that falls headfirst to the
ground. Another barbarian stands to the right, his back turned to the viewer. He is nude, and he
raises his right sword arm, stretching to fill the full height of the scene. There is a shield on his
left arm. To his right, a Roman soldier prepares to strike a nude barbarian who kneels before
115

him. The Roman holds the hair of his foe, who looks upwards at his attacker. The barbarian
wears a torque around his neck. Behind this pair, a Roman horseman, leaping to the right, twists
and raise his arm to strike to the left. Barely visible to his left is the head of a barbarian. It is
unclear if this is the Roman horseman’s opponent.
The Romans largely dominate the top of the scene. As a result, the battle is broken into
two distinct zones, with the victorious Romans at the top and their defeated enemy below;
however, these zones are broken by three barbarians. One is the barbarian horseman at the top
center of the scene, the second is the man to the right of the horseman, and the third is the nude
twisting barbarian, with his arm raised and back turned. These men are still actively engaged in
the fight, unlike all of their falling allies.
The central Roman horseman, with the flowing cape and hidden face, is the focal point of
the scene. His body is completely visible, in front of all of the surrounding action. He is probably
intended to act as a representation of the deceased, though his face is hidden. This Roman wears
the same uniform as the other soldiers, though he is rendered on a slightly larger scale than the
rest of the figures.
Ca. 170 CE (Andreae), ca. 130-140 CE (Hamberg)

2. Dallas Museum Sarcophagus, fig. 46
Marble. H: 0.63 m. L: 2.83 m.
Dallas Museum of Art 2012, pp. 144-145.
The scene on this sarcophagus is framed by two tropaea, underneath each of which sits a
barbarian captive. Both captives are completely nude, with their hands tied behind their backs
and torques around their necks. On the far left of the scene, there is a Roman soldier on

116

horseback. His horse leaps to the right, but the Roman turns back to the left, raising a spear in his
right arm to strike the barbarian below him. This barbarian is falling from his horse, his right arm
and leg still up on the horse, and his left leg intertwined with the animal’s legs. To the right of
this pair, a second Roman soldier on horseback bounds to the right. In full uniform, he raises his
sword with his right arm over his head, obscuring his face. His victim sits on the ground below
him, raising himself on his left arm and looking up at his assailant. This barbarian wears a tunic,
and his horse falls to the ground beside him. Behind this barbarian, a nude barbarian on a horse
flees to the left, his cape billowing behind him. A nude barbarian stands next to him, his back
turned to the view. He holds a shield on his left arm and raises his right arm, which holds his
sword, over his head, stretching his body upwards. To the right of this barbarian, the head of
bearded barbarian can be seen in the background, facing a Roman cavalryman. The Roman
wears full military armor and raises a spear in his right arm, his head bent back awkwardly. His
horse strides right but he turns to face left. Another Roman stands in the forefront, in full
uniform, holding his sword high in his right hand. With his left hand, he grasps the head of a
barbarian who sits at his feet. The barbarians has wild hair and wears a torque, and he looks up at
the Roman, trying to push away his hand. Another Roman horseman stands to the right of this
pair, bounding to the right. He wears full military garb and holds his sword over his head to
strike, covering his face. This Roman’s foe stands behind him, and as such the Roman turns so
his back is facing the viewer. The head of his victim can be seen, his left arm raised for
protection.
This sarcophagus features five Roman soldiers, eight barbarians, and two barbarian
captives. The Romans are clearly winning this battle, as almost every barbarian is being struck
down and all the Romans are safe from attack. The Romans are mixed in with the barbarians

117

throughout the scene, with both occupying space along the top of the sarcophagus; however, the
barbarians dominate the lowest part of the scene, further evidence for their impending defeat.
The Romans soldiers are all in full military gear, including helmets, greaves skirts with pteruges,
and saga. The barbarians are variously dressed, though most are nude or mostly nude, wearing
only a torque or cape. The torques and wild hair of the barbarians suggest that they may
represent Gauls.
All of the figures in this scene are presented on the same scale, though they have
awkward body proportions. The sculptor therefore used flying drapery, flailing limbs, and raised
weapons to fill in the empty spaces between figures.
Ca. 190 CE

3. Small Villa Doria Pamphili, fig. 47
Luna marble. H: 0.86 m. L: 2.30 m.
Villa Doria Pamphili
Matz-Duhn II n. 3320; Bieńkowski 1908, pp. 43-54, pl. 9a; Schober 1951, p. 64; Reinach 1912,
p. 247, fig. 2; Andreae 1956 p. 15, n. 8, pl. 3; Calza 1977, pp. 201-202, cat. no. 232, pl. 87; Koch
and Sichtermann 1982, p. 91, pl. 75; Andreae 1992, pp. 44, 59; Krierer 1995, pp. 95-96, 211, cat.
no. S 06, pl. 33.119; Krierer 2004, p. 197, cat. no. 189, pl. 38.3; Alexandrescu 2010, p. 334, cat.
no. P 40; Faust 2012, pp. 182-183, pl. 71.
Tropaea frame this sarcophagus, and below each sits a barbarian captive, seated on a rock
with his hands tied behind his back. On the left of the sarcophagus, a Roman cavalryman twists
so his chest faces forward, raising his right arm to strike as his horse leaps to the right. The nude
barbarian below him falls from his horse, his legs still wrapped around the creature and his back
turned to the viewer. To the right is another Roman horseman, in full uniform with his cape
flowing back. His right arm is raised to strike his opponent, completely covering his face.
118

Directly below him, the sarcophagus is badly damaged, though an arm bearing a shield is visible,
suggesting that we are missing the fallen body of a barbarian fighter. The Roman horseman
prepares to strike the barbarian who has fallen to the ground before him, looking up at his
vanquisher. In the background, a barbarian horseman flees to the left , his cape and right arm
flowing behind. In front of him, a nude barbarian with his back turned to the viewer stretches up,
spanning the height of the scene. He turns to face the Roman cavalryman to the right. This
Roman bounds to the left and twists so his back is facing the viewer. His right arm is raised to
strike. Below his feet, a barbarian horseman with a torque around his neck collapses to the
ground upon his horse’s broken body. On the right of the scene, a Roman cavalryman, striding
right, twists and raises his arms to strike a foe to the left. Below him, a Roman soldier on foot
raises his sword to strike the nude barbarian who kneels at his feet. A horse can be seen behind
the pair, perhaps the horse of this fallen barbarian.
The figures are largely rendered on the same scale, thus the sculptor used flailing limbs
and broken bodies to fill much of the empty space. All of the Romans are shown in full uniform,
and the soldiers dominate the top of the scene. Only the fleeing barbarian at the center breaks this
division of space. The figures closer to the top of the scene seem to float through the air,
suggesting that they stand on a higher, or perhaps slanting, ground line.
Ca. 180 CE

4. Via Tiburtina, fig. 48
Marble. L: 2.31 m. H: 0.69 m.
Palazzo Massimo alle Terme inv. 108437

119

Paribeni 1932, p. 112; Schober 1951, p. 64; Aurigemma 1954, p. 48, cat. no. 93; Andreae 1956,
p. 14, no. 4, pl. 2; Krierer 1995, pp. 92-93, cat. no. S 03, pls. 28-30; Krierer 2004, Cat. 186, pl.
30.4.
This sarcophagus is heavily damaged, particularly in the center and right of the scene.
Framing the scene on either side is a nude, crouching barbarian with his hands tied behind his
back. Above him floats a winged Victory, holding a tropaeum. On the far left of the scene, a
horse strains has he falls to the ground, losing his nude barbarian passenger. The barbarian falls
with his back towards the audience, his right arm and leg still on the horse and his left leg
entwined with the creature’s leg. Above him, a Roman cavalryman, whose horse leaps to the
right, twists around and reaches out his now missing right arm, presumably to strike his victim.
The Roman wears a muscled cuirass, sagum, pteuges, greaves, and a plumed helmet. His
position on his horse is not physically possible. To the right of this pair, a horse rears up carrying
a Roman cavalryman, whose head is now missing. The soldier’s muscled cuirass, sagum, and
pteurges are clearly visible. His missing right arm was raised before him to strike. Though the
head of this Roman is missing, his hunched shoulders suggest that he was looking down towards
his victim, his face covered by his raised right arm. His opponent sits before him, a barbarian
wearing a tunic, holding a sword to his chest and looking up at the Roman. Beside this man, a
nude barbarian body lies crumpled on the ground, his head on the ground and his left arm
outstretched. This central part of the sarcophagus is badly damaged. The only preserved figure is
a barbarian horseman, wearing a cape and cap, who rushes to the right with his right arm raised.
The man, who appears to be fleeing, turns and looks up and to the right. Near the back of his
horse, the legs and torso of a nude man can be seen, falling headfirst towards the ground. On the
right of the sarcophagus, past the damaged area, the leg and pteruges of a standing Roman
soldier are visible. The crumpled body of a barbarian lies on the ground between his legs. The
120

Roman stretches out his left had to grasp the hair of a nude barbarian who kneels before him,
reaching up in an attempt to push away his assailant. On the far right of the sarcophagus, a nude
barbarian stands, stretching the full height of the scene. He holds his sword across his chest and
his shield above his head. He lunges left towards an unseen enemy.
Ca. 170-180 CE

5. Small Ludovisi, fig. 49
Fine grain marble. H: 0.66 m. L: 2.48 m.
Museo Nazionale Romano, inv. 8569
Schreiber 1880, p. 151, no. 138; Helbig 1896 (II), p. 123-124, n. 891; Bieńkowski 1908, p. 40,
43, 60, pl. 6a; Reinach 1912, p. 330, fig. 3; Andreae 1956, p. 14, n. 5; Koch and Sichtermann
1982, p. 91; Guiliano 1983, pp. 49-53, n. 23; Krierer 1995, pp. 71-211, cat. S 04, pls. 31-33;
Gabelmann 1996, p. 34; De Angelis D’Ossat 2002, p. 252, inv. 8569; Krierer 2004, Cat. 188, pl.
30.2; Landskron 2005, pp. 69-74, pl. 5, figs. 21-22; Rivière 2008, p. 167f; Heitz 2009, p. 215;
Alexandrescu 2010, cat. no. P 35, pl. 32; De Angelis D’Ossat 2011, pp. 252-253; Faust 2012, p.
184, pl. 73.1.
This sarcophagus is well preserved, though some of the facial details have faded. The
scene is framed by winged Victories, who stand above nude barbarians crouching in the two
bottom corners. On the far left of the sarcophagus, a Roman soldier in full uniform can be seen.
The man turns his head to the left. His horse strides outwards towards the viewer, its legs turned
slightly to the left and his head turned to the right. Below, a barbarian wearing trousers falls
headfirst to the ground. His back is turned to the audience, and his left arm is outstretched. A
Roman horseman in full uniform leaps to the right beside him. He raises his right arm to strike,
covering his face. This man is completely unobscured by the surrounding action. His horse’s
head wraps behind him to look left. Two legs and the torso of a man wearing a tunic can be seen
below his horse. This barbarian’s head and arms are either missing or obscured by the
121

surrounding figures. Behind the Roman horseman, a second Roman on horse rushes to the right.
He is in full uniform, his sagum billowing behind him, and he raises a spear with his right arm.
To his right, a barbarian horseman, wearing trousers, leaps to the right, looking back over his
shoulder. He flexes his wrist in a gesture of surprise. Another barbarian horseman falls below
him. The man, with wild hair and beard and wearing a tunic and trousers, falls backwards, his
shield raised and his sword at his side. His legs are still wrapped around the horse that falls
before him. Standing behind this horse, a man, facing backwards, twists to the left. His head and
right arm are missing, but he seems to be preparing to strike. The central figure in this scene is
completely isolated from the surrounding action, his entire body unobscured. Sitting on his
horse, he strides to the right, while raising his right arm to strike. His cloak billows out behind
him. This man’s chest is turned to face the viewer, though his head is focused into the battle.
Two nude barbarians fall below him: one falls headfirst, the other has his back arched and his
arms drawn back, his left leg still caught around the reigns of his horse which tries to flee. A
third barbarian stands to the right of the central figure, his sword raised over his head and his
cape billowing. A Roman soldier in full uniform stands to the right of the barbarian, holding his
sword across his chest and preparing to swing. Below this pair, there are two more barbarians.
One lies dead upon the ground, his head awkwardly forced back so that he faces the viewer
upside down. The second nude barbarian is about to fall on top of him. He falls from his horse
with his back to the viewer, his right arm and leg still wrapped around the creature. A Roman
soldier on horseback stands above him, his horse rushing to the right with its head turned back to
the left. The Roman twists to the left with his cloak billowing back. On the far right of the
sarcophagus, a Roman soldier in full uniform leans to the right, his arms held up, perhaps to hold
a trumpet. A barbarian falls before him, his horse plunging headfirst to the ground.

122

All of the Romans on this sarcophagus wear full uniform, including helmets, muscle
cuirasses, tunics with pteruges, and saga. The barbarians are variously dressed, some nude and
others in tunics and trousers, though they all have wild hair. The Romans generally dominate the
top of the scene, though two barbarians break this division. The remaining eight barbarians are
either falling or have already fallen. The Romans are clearly the victors of this battle.
The central figure, who stands out clearly in the scene, appears to have had some portrait
features and is likely a representation of the deceased. All of the figures depicted on the same
scale, though the horses are smaller than they should be. Most of the empty space within the
scene is filled in with billowing drapery and awkwardly bent limbs, but a large amount of empty
space surrounds the central figure. This may be in part due to preservation, as his arm and his
horse’s head would have filled much of this space.
Ca. 175-180 CE

6. Concordia University, fig. 50
Proconnesian marble. H: 0.39 m. L: 1.71 m.
Francis 2000, pp. 332-337, pls. 1, 3.
Framing the sarcophagus stand two Roman soldiers, each holding a tropaeum. Over the
shoulder of the Roman soldier on the left, a horse can be seen. To the right of the horse, a Roman
horseman bounds to the right. His right arm is extended forward as he prepares to stab the man
before him, a lunging, bearded barbarian wearing a cape and trousers. Between the pair, a second
barbarian, also bearded and wearing trousers, falls to the ground with his left arm raised in
defense. Right of this group, a Roman cavalryman leaps to the right with his right arm drawn
back. The crumpled body of a defeated barbarian lies below his horse. A Roman soldier stands

123

beside them, lunging to the right. His left arm is raised to hold the reigns of the horse behind
him, while his right arm is drawn back, holding a dagger. A barbarian, wearing a tunic, trousers,
and cloak, falls to the ground before him, attempting to defend himself with his right arm. The
center of the scene is dominated by a Roman horseman. His horse strides right but turns his head
to the viewer. The Roman soldier poses with his right arm thrown back, his cloak billowing out
behind him. He looks outwards, away from the action that surround him. A barbarian in trousers
sits at the feet of this Roman soldier, looking up at his conqueror. To the right of this central pair
is a group of three figures. Two Roman soldiers, one on a horse leaping to the right and the other
on foot lunging left, frame a bearded barbarian. Both soldiers raise weapons, prepared to strike
the barbarian, who has fallen to the ground and attempts to raise his shield in defense. The
barbarian has his back turned to the viewer, while both Romans twist so that their chests face
outwards. Two final pairs occupy the right side of the scene. The first pair includes a Roman
soldier who stands over a barbarian. The Roman, in full uniform, holds the head of the barbarian
and prepares to slit his throat. The barbarian, wearing a tunic, trousers, and cape, kneels on the
ground, his head bent back awkwardly as he raises his left arm in an attempt to fight off the
Roman. The final pair features a Roman horseman, striding right, who raises his right hand to
strike. Before him stands a barbarian wearing trousers. The barbarian’s back is turned to the
audience, and he holds a shield, though it is clear that the Roman will strike him down.
All of the Roman soldiers on this sarcophagus are identically dressed, in plumed helmets,
muscle cuirasses, tunics, and saga. The exception is the central figure who is not wearing a
helmet. This figure is centrally placed and removed from the surrounding action. His face shows
signs of portrait features, setting him apart from the other soldiers. He is likely intended to
represent the deceased. This figure is rendered on a smaller scale than the others, which is

124

perhaps a result of the sculptor’s desire to further separate him from the scene. The other Roman
horsemen fit perfectly into the space without being shrunken down. The head of the central
figure is similarly smaller than the other figures, which may have resulted from the postproduction application of portrait features.
The Roman soldiers dominate the top half of the scene. Every Romans raises his hand to
strike, and as such there can be no doubt who will win this battle. Almost all of the barbarians
have already fallen, thus dominating the lower half of the scene. The two exceptions including
the standing barbarian on the far left and his counterpart on the far right. Both of these men
continue to fight, breaking the plane of separation between the conquerors and conquered,
though their defeats are imminent.
Ca. 160-170 CE

7. Small Campo Santo, fig. 51
Marble. H: 0.73 m. L: 1.95 m.
Bieńkowski 1908, pl. 7b; Andreae 1956, p. 15, n. 6; Arias, Cristiani, Gabba 1977, pp. 64-65, n.
A 13 est, pl. 15; Faust 2012, p. 197, n. 1094.
This sarcophagus is heavily weathered and in low relief. The main scene is framed by
two tropaea. To the left of the scene, a Roman soldier on a horse, striding to the left, raises his
right arm and looks down upon a nude enemy, who sits on the ground with his back to the
audience, reaching up towards his foe. Beside him, a bearded barbarian in trousers extends an
arm towards a Roman horseman, twisting his body so that his back is turned. A Roman trumpeter
stands behind this group. To the right, two horsemen face each other. The man towards the top of
the scene is bearded and wears a cap, thus he is probably a barbarian. His horse leaps to the right
and he looks down upon the second horseman, a beardless man wearing what appears to be full
125

Roman military garb. This second horseman leaps towards the top left of the scene, his back to
the audience as he pursues the man behind him. He holds a sword raised to strike in his right
hand and a shield in his left, and his cape flows behind him. Right of this pair is another Roman
cavalryman. His horse bounds to the right, and his right arm (now missing) extends behind him,
preparing to strike, causing his cape to flow back. Though looking to his right, the soldier’s body
is twisted to face the audience. The centrality of this figure and the majesty of his flowing cape
suggest that he may be a representation of the deceased. His facial features and beard may be
portrait features. Before him, a second horseman, angled in such a way to parallel the previously
discussed pair of horsemen, leaps up towards the Roman soldier with his arms outstretched. This
man is bearded and wears a tunic, and he is presumably a barbarian. Below his horse lies the
crumpled body of a dead barbarian, nude and with wild hair. To the right of this cavalry group,
another Roman horseman rushes to the right in full military gear and his arm raised to strike. A
bearded barbarian, wearing a tunic and a cap, holds his shield over his head in one arm and the
crumpled body of a second, trouser-wearing barbarian in his other. On the far right of the scene,
a Roman soldier raises his arm to strike this barbarian. In front of this Roman soldier, a nude
barbarian with his back turned to the viewer raises a sword to strike the Roman horseman. These
four figures create a more complex scene: he horseman and nude barbarian fight diagonally from
each other, crossing the path of the tunic-wearing barbarian and his Roman adversary.
The Roman soldiers largely dominate the upper part of the scene, showing their
inevitable victory, though there is one fighting pair in which the barbarian horseman stands over
his Roman counterpart. The scene is broken into individual fighting pairs, broken up only on the
right side of the scene where the four figures fight in diagonal pairs.

126

The sculptor used foreshortening to show depth in the scene. Five figures fight with their
backs turned to the viewer in order to create a sense of depth within the scene. The result,
however, is undermined by the low relief. Three of the turned figures stand exactly parallel with
each other, as do the four horsemen along the back of the scene. A great deal of empty space
remains between the figures.
Ca. 180 BCE

8. Badia di Farfa, fig. 52
Marble. No dimensions published.
Andreae 1969, p. 153, fig. 5; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, p. 91; Landskron 2005, pp. 69-74, pl.
7, figs. 27-28; Reinsberg 2006, p. 95; Amedick 2007 pp. 1-11, pl. 8.1; Faust 2012, p. 186, no.
1032, pl. 74; Russenberger 2015, p. 332-336, fig. 152.
Crypt of the Badia di Farfa
On the left of the scene, two Roman soldiers in full uniform, one on foot and one on
horse, raise their arms to strike a nude barbarian, who lunges to the right with his back turned to
the viewer. Beside this group, two barbarians, both with beards and wearing tunics, face a
Roman cavalryman to their right, who leaps to the left, with one arm raised to strike and the
other holding a shield. A third barbarian lies injured at the feet of this group, wearing a tunic and
trousers. Bounding to the right, another Roman cavalry man raises his right arm, his body twisted
so that his chest faces the audience. He looks down upon a nude barbarian, who kneels to the
ground and looks away from the Roman. To the right of the Roman cavalryman, a barbarian in
the background raises his arm to strike. In front of him, a horse rears as his rider, a barbarian
wearing a tunic, falls to the ground. The barbarian has one leg and one arm raised, his back
turned to the viewer. A Roman soldier stands behind the horse, raising his right arm to strike a
127

bearded barbarian in trousers, who extends his right arm in supplication. At his feet lies the
crumpled body of a barbarian. Behind the pair stands a Roman trumpeter. To the right of this
group is another Roman cavalryman, who rushes to the right and prepares to strike. Below the
horse is another fallen barbarian. One more Roman horseman stands to his right, preparing to
strike the barbarian at his feet, who is kneeling with his sword over his head. On the far right of
the scene, a standing barbarian holds his sword over his head to strike the Roman horseman.
This scene is not broken into one-on-one battles; instead, there is a variety different
groupings, with multiple Romans striking a single barbarian, or multiple barbarians striking the
same Roman soldier. The barbarians outnumber the Romans, though many are showed injured or
dying. Although some barbarians stand at the top of the scene, the Romans dominate this upper
half, a sign of their superiority in the battle. The figures are largely rendered on the same scale,
with some foreshortening applied.
Andreae (1969) identifies this scene as a battle between the Greeks and Persians. This
identification accounts for the helmets, trousers, and tunics of the barbarian fighters. Many of the
other fighters may wear Greek dress; however, the two soldiers on the far left and the horseman
just left of the center are wearing Roman armor. Thus this scene may also be identified as a
battle between Romans and barbarians.
Ca. 170 CE

9. Badia di Cava, fig. 53
Marble. H: 0.9 m. L: 0.47 m.
Andreae 1969, p. 153, fig. 4; Guerrini 1972, pp. 68-69, pl. 66b; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, p.
91, fig. 73; Bielfeldt 2005, pp. 189-191, fig. 59; Amedick 2007, pp. 7-10; Faust 2012, p. 187, n.
1033; Russenberger 2015, p. 332-336, fig. 151.

128

The scene on this sarcophagus is poorly preserved. On the far left stands a nude figure
who looks onto the ensuing battle. This is likely a captive. To the right of this figure, a
cavalryman in full armor bounds to the right, his right arm swinging behind him. The man’s face
is now faded, but his military gear, including a muscle cuirass and tunic, is discernable. Below
him, a barbarian, wearing trousers, falls forward on the crumpled body of his horse. A horse can
be seen behind the falling barbarian, leaping to the right. An indiscernible figure is in front of the
horse, perhaps the body of its rider, falling forward and holding the left arm of the barbarian
below. To the right of this group, a bearded man stands, facing to the left, with his right arm
raised to strike and his left arm bearing a shield. It is difficult to determine if this man is clothed,
though he seems to have a sleeve on his right shoulder which would be typical for a full Roman
uniform. A barbarian kneels below this man with his sword arm at his side, clearly defeated as he
looks to the ground. He wears a tunic, trousers, and a cap. The body of a dead barbarian lies to
his right. Another barbarian can be seen to the right of this pair. His back is completely turned to
the viewer and his right leg and left arm are raised as he falls from the back of his horse. He
wears a tunic that falls off his shoulder and holds a dagger in his right hand. Above him, a
horseman looks down on him, with his right arm raised to strike. A sleeve is visible on his right
arm, likely part of a Roman uniform. The final pair in this scene includes a man on the ground
who looks up towards a nude man, who raises his sword to strike a final blow. The man on the
ground appears to be in full uniform, and his attacker seems to wear a helmet. On the far right, a
figure wearing a tunic stands, probably another captive.
The poor preservation of this sarcophagus makes it difficult to comfortably identity the
figures in the scene. Andreae (1969) identifies the scene as a battle between the Greeks and
Persians. This sarcophagus may also be showing a battle between Romans and barbarians. The

129

three men in full uniform could be Roman soldiers, while the nude and tunic-wearing men may
be barbarians.
Ca. 170 CE

10. Palazzo Giustiniani, fig. 54
Marble. No dimensions published.
Galleria Giustiniani II n. 134; Reinach 1912, p. 262, fig. 1; Matz-Duhn II n. 3331; Rizzo 1904,
pp. 62-66; Bieńkowski 1908, pp. 31-60, pl. 6b; Andreae 1956 p. 15, no. 7; Brilliant 1963, p. 185,
fig. 4.62; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, p. 92; Cossiga 1984, p. 197; Musso 1985, p. 186; Krierer
1995, pp. 94-95, cat. no. S 05, pl. 33.118; Candilio 2001, pp. 481-488; Krierer 2004, p. 198, cat.
no. 194, pl. 37.3; Alexandrescu 2010, cat. no. P 42, pl. 35; Faust 2012, p. 197, n. 1095.
Framing the scene are two winged Victories, standing above two barbarian captives, each
with his hands tied behind his back and wearing trousers. On the left of the scene, a Roman
horseman in full military gear leaps to the right, his right arm drawn back to strike an unseen
enemy. Below him, a nude barbarian kneels to the left, raising his left arm which bears a shield.
A second nude barbarian kneels to the right of this man, reaching his arms down to aid the
crumpled body of one of his fallen comrades. His gaze is directed up towards the central figure,
who stands out as the clear focal point of the scene. This Roman’s horse bounds to the right, as
he twists his body back to the left with his right arm pulled back, causing his chest to face the
viewer. His haircut and facial features suggest that this is a portrait of the deceased. He wears
full military gear, but no helmet. His gaze is locked on to the barbarian who approaches him, his
body twisting to strike. This man wears only a helmet, and his body is turned so that his back
faces the viewer. Below the central figure’s horse, a Roman soldier has fallen to the ground,
perhaps having tripped over the barbarian body upon which he now sits. The arm of this
barbarian is clearly visible, reaching out from below the Roman. This is one of the few instances
130

in which a battle scene shows a fallen Roman. Behind the central Roman horseman are two
horsemen rushing to the left, one a Roman and the other a barbarian, and between them a
trumpeter facing right. Facing downwards with his face obscured, the Roman horseman is
preparing to strike an unseen enemy. To the right of the fleeing barbarian horseman, another
horse is rearing back, having just unseated a nude barbarian, whose body can be seen falling to
the ground headfirst. He is about to land upon the fallen body of another horse and a nude
barbarian. The reigns of the rearing horse are held by the Roman soldier standing on the far right
of the scene. One last barbarian horseman can be seen rushing to the right behind his Roman
soldier, perhaps in an attempt at fleeing the battle.
All of the Romans in this battle scene wear full military armor, while all of the barbarians
are nude or wear just a helmet. The two barbarian captives wear trousers.
There can be no doubt that the Romans were victorious in this battle. Three barbarians
are shown dead, and many others are shown dying. The Roman soldiers dominate the top of the
scene, most of them confidently striking down foes. The exception is the Roman soldier who lies
at the feet of the central Roman horseman, who may represent the courage of the central figure to
protect his allies. The central Roman and his nude barbarian combatant are the clear focus of the
scene. Both figures stretch the full height of the scene and stand forward from the crowded
action. The barbarians who are shown at the top of the scene are attempting to flee.
The figures in this scene are rendered on different scales in order to fill the space. The
winged Victories and barbarian captives that frame the scene are much smaller than the other
figures, while the central Roman horseman and his foe are much larger. Such variation in scale
can be seen throughout the scene.
Ca. 180 CE

131

11. Ince Blundell, fig. 55
Parian Marble. H: 0.73 m. L: 2.28 m.
Ince Blundell Collection at the Liverpool Museum
Bieńkowski 1908, pl. 7a; Ashmole 1929, p. 101, pl. 303; Andreae 1956, p. 14, no. 2; Krierer
2004, p. 197, cat. no. 190, pl. 38.2; Faust 2012, p. 197, n. 1094.
Flanking this battle scene stand two tropaea, below each of which sits a barbarian
captive. Each captive is nude and bearded, and sits with his arms tied behind his back, looking up
at the tropaea. The twisted bodies of the two men, with their chests facing the viewer and their
legs turned in towards the main action, invite the viewer’s eyes into the center of the scene. The
left of the scene is dominated by a Roman soldier on horseback in full uniform with his sword
drawn. He faces a beardless barbarian who wears only a helmet and whose back is turned to the
viewer. This barbarian is raising his shield in defense of the Roman’s sword. He stands above
two fallen barbarians: a clothed barbarian lies face down under the Roman’s horse, and to his
right a bearded barbarian, wearing a cape, has fallen to the ground and looks up at another
Roman cavalryman. This barbarian holds a sword in his ribcage, perhaps in an act of suicide.
The Roman above him twists to look back at the Roman and nude barbarian fighting behind him.
His sword is raised above his head, ready to strike. Although somewhat central within the scene,
this Roman soldier faces away from the viewer. Immediately to the right of this Roman
cavalryman, a bearded barbarian, with sword raised, approaches. The center of the scene is
dominated by a barbarian horseman who crumples to the ground. This barbarian is fully clothed
in trousers and a tunic. His face is hidden as he is crouched flat over his collapsing horse. Above
him stands another beardless barbarian. This barbarian stands fully frontal to the viewer, tilting
his head up and to the left. He is not actively engaged in the fight. To the right of this figure, a
third Roman cavalryman in full uniform draws his sword against a beardless barbarian, who
132

wears a helmet and tunic. The Roman’s body is twisted so that his front faces the viewer, while
the barbarian is twisted so that his back faces the viewer. Below this pair, a barbarian lies on the
ground with his back arched. He holds a sword, driven into his chest, which again may be a
suicide attempt. A shield lies directly behind his broken body. On the far right of the scene, one
final Roman soldier stands, almost exactly in line with the tunic wearing barbarian. This Roman
holds a shield and raises a trumpet.
All of the Roman soldiers on this sarcophagus wear full military gear, including a muscle
cuirass, skirt with pteruges, and a helmet. One Roman horseman also wears a sagum. The
barbarians are more randomly dressed. Some are nude, others wear a cape, while others wear
tunics and trousers.
The Romans in this scene dominate the middle and top of the sarcophagus, while the
barbarians are either placed below the Romans, dying at their feet, or are carefully framed
between the Roman soldiers. Three barbarians do break this separation of space, stretching to the
top of the scene, but each of them is about to be struck down by a Roman soldier. Every Roman
depicted in this scene has his front facing the viewer, while the bodies of the barbarians are
contorted to face all possible directions. The bottom of the scene is occupied by the four dying
barbarians and the two barbarian captives, making the outcome of the battle immediately clear to
the viewer.
This battle scene does not have an obvious central figure. None of the three Roman
horsemen face the viewer, and none have a cape flowing victoriously behind them in the wind.
Indeed the figure that stands out as the most, being both frontal and central, is the nude barbarian
who looks up to the right. Though his facial features are poorly preserved, the angle of the head
is an obvious indication of the dramatic expression of the figure.

133

All of the figures within this scene are depicted on the same scale. This creates a great
deal of empty space between the figures. Though some of this space is filled in with limbs and
swords, particularly in the bottom half of the scene, the sculptor did not make use of drapery to
fill the empty spaces in the upper part of the sarcophagus.
Ca. 170-180 CE

12. Large Campo Santo, fig. 56
Marble. H: 1.05 m. L: 2.40 m.
Campo Santo C 21 est
Rodenwaldt 1935, p. 24-25, pl. 9; Andreae 1956 p. 15, no. 11; Brilliant 1963, p. 157; Arias,
Cristiani, Gabba 1977, pp. 151-152, n. C 21 est, pl. 92-93; Jung 1978, pp. 330-333; Koch and
Sichtermann 1982, p. 260; Wrede 2001, pl. 5; Alexandrescu 2010, Cat. P 37; Faust 2012, p. 197,
n. 1095.
On the far left of the sarcophagus, a standing female captive and kneeling male captive in
trousers and a cape are surrounded by fallen shields and helmets. The male’s arms appear to be
tied behind his back. Above the pair is a winged Victory. On the far right of the sarcophagus, a
male captive in trousers and a tunic, his hands bound before him, stands with a female captive,
now almost completely missing. The wing of a now missing Victory can be seen above.
In the top left of the scene, a Roman soldier on horseback strides to the right. His head is
missing, but he wears full military uniform. The man raises his right arm, which is now missing,
and his cloak billows out behind him. To his right, in very low relief, another Roman soldier can
be seen. In front of this figure are the torso and leg of a barbarian, who wears a tunic and trousers
and rides a horse that leaps to the right. Two more Roman cavalrymen bound to the right before
him, both in full uniform. The head of one of these figures is missing, and the other figure is in
extremely low relief. On the far left of the scene, two more figures can be seen. One is a Roman
134

soldier on horseback. This figure is badly damaged, though his pteruges and the sleeve of his
tunic are visible. His horse leaps to the right. Below him, a barbarian wearing trousers collapses
forward onto his fallen horse. A second falling horse is barely discernible behind him, and a third
horse falls before him. Above this third horse, a barbarian horseman rushes to the right. The
figure is badly damaged, but he appears to be twisting so that his back is turned to the audience
and he faces the horsemen behind him. Here the sarcophagus has received extensive damaged,
and the central figures are entirely missing. An unidentifiable figure rides a horse at the top right
corner of this damaged area. Before him, the tunic and bottom of the cuirass of a Roman soldier
can be seen upon a damaged horse who leaps right. A Roman soldier peaks out from behind this
horse, looking to the left. He is largely obscured by a shield. To his right, the underside of a
horse can be seen, above which what appears to be an arm wearing a long-sleeve tunic appears.
Below this figure is a horse that projects forward from the scene, and on his back is the knee and
pteruges of a Roman soldier. This soldier leans far forward on his horse, reaching around the
horse’s head. His cloak can be seen flying straight upwards. Below the damaged portion of the
scene, two feet of a Roman soldier are visible. A horse falls to the right of these feet, and the foot
of a barbarian can be seen on its side, suggesting that its rider, now missing, would have been
falling from its back. To the right of this horse, another horse falls, again with the trouserwearing leg of a barbarian clearly visible. A third horse plunges headfirst towards the ground.
The tunic and trousers of its rider are visible, lunging to the left. Above this horse, another horse
rears back. Its rider wears a tunic and holds a shield. The legs, arms, and head of the rider are
missing, and he is difficult to identify. Before this horse, a billowing cloak is visible, along with
a detached shin, foot, and bent arm.

135

Unlike the other battle sarcophagi, most of the men in this scene are on horseback. At
various points throughout the sarcophagus, there are nubs of marble where other figures had
once been attached, which would have filled in much of the empty space. The surviving figures
are rendered in a combination of high and low relief, creating a sense of depth. The Roman
soldiers who are visible all wear full uniform, whereas the barbarians wear tunics and trousers.
Although the center of the scene is missing, it seems as though the surrounding figures are
encircling this space, suggesting that a central commander figure may have been depicted here. It
is difficult to tell where the Roman and barbarian figures are located relative to one another,
though on the left side of the sarcophagus, the Roman soldiers do dominate the upper portion.
Ca. 190 CE

13. Villa Borghese, fig. 57
Luni marble. H: 0.98 m. L: 2.38 m.
Villa Borghese Casino inv. 557
Reinach 1912, p. 170, fig. 4; Rodenwaldt 1935, p. 25, pl. 10; Hamberg 1945, p. 179-181, pl. 41;
Andreae 1956, p. 16, no. 16; Pelikán 1965, pp. 53-55; Turcan 1966, pp. 178, 210, 213, and 245;
Jung 1978, pp. 330-333; Schäfer 1979, pp. 355-382, figs. 1-15; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, p.
92; Krierer 1995, pp. 99-100, cat. no. S 09, pls. 41-42; Turcan 1999, p. 64, fig. 68; Wrede 2001,
p. 40; Moreno and Viacava 2003, pp. 91-92, no. 47; Krierer 2004, p. 198, cat. no. 196, pl. 34.10;
Landskron 2005, p. 69-74, pl. 6, fig. 23; Reinsberg 2006, p. 221, cat. no. 96, pl. 25.3; Rivière
2008, p. 169; Alexandrescu 2010, cat. no. P 41, pl. 34; Töpfer 2011, pp. 248, 379, cat. no. SD
63; Faust 2012, pp. 204-205, pl. 79.2.
This battle scene is framed on either side by tropaea and two barbarian captives, one
male and one female, with a helmet on the ground between them. On the left of the scene, a
Roman horseman, whose head and arm are now missing, prepares to strike down a barbarian,
who turns to face the Roman, his back towards the viewer. Between the pair, a barbarian can be

136

seen on the ground. Behind the Roman horseman, a barbarian horseman rushes to the left, trying
to flee the battle. He is closely followed by a second barbarian horseman. Both look back at a
Roman horseman who pursues the two, his sword raised. At the bottom of the scene, a barbarian
and his horse fall to the ground. The barbarian, who is nude, still wraps his legs around the
creature, his back turned to the audience. Above him, a Roman soldier in full uniform stands,
grasping the hair of a barbarian who sits on the ground wearing a tunic. The Roman soldier’s
right arm is missing, but he likely raises a sword. To the right, a Roman horseman leaps to the
left, and behind him, a Roman soldier follows behind him with his sword raised, as another
Roman soldier stands looking down upon a barbarian. This barbarian cowers on the ground
beside his horse, looking up at his assailant. Another barbarian horseman is on the ground beside
him, shirtless and with a thick beard. He looks up towards the central figure of the scene. This
Roman horseman is in full uniform, with his sagum flowing back behind him. His right arm, now
missing, is raised to strike. The head of this figure is badly damaged, or perhaps was never
carved. Behind him, a Roman horseman rushes to the right, pursuing a barbarian horseman, who
wears a tunic and trousers and turns to look at the Roman. Below this pair are two Roman
soldiers, one on horse and the other on foot wearing scale armor. Both of their heads are missing.
They look down upon three barbarians. One, wearing a tunic and trousers, kneels on the ground
with his right arm raised in supplication. His head is missing, but he might be looking towards
the central figure. The crumpled body of a nude barbarian lies between his legs and the third
barbarian sits on the ground behind him. His head is also missing, but he probably looks towards
the Roman in scale armor.
The poorer preservation of this sarcophagus, as well as the shallowly carved clothing
makes the scene difficult to read. Generally, the Roman and barbarian soldiers are well mixed

137

within the scene, though the barbarians dominate the lowest level with their broken and dying
bodies. The Roman soldier dominate the center of the scene as barbarians flee on horse to either
side. Almost all of the figures in this scene are fully clothed, and the drapery itself is rather
heavy, giving a weightiness to the scene as a whole.
Ca. 190-210 CE

14. Palermo, fig. 58
Marble. H: 0.48 m. L: 1.77 m.
Palermo, Museo Nazionale inv. 739/90
Bieńkowski 1908, p. 54, pl. 2a; Reinach 1912, p. 99, fig. 1; Hamberg 1945, pp. 175-176, pl. 39;
Andreae 1956, p. 15, no. 9; Brilliant 1963, p. 186, fig. 4.63; Tusa 1995, pp. 76-77, cat. no. 77,
pls. 72-78; Krierer 2004, cat. no. 192, pl. 38.1; Moscati and Di Stefano 2006, pp. 91-92, fig. 98.
Both sides of the sarcophagus are framed by tropaea and a male and female captive, with
a helmet lying between them. On the far left of the battle scene, a Roman horseman, whose head
is now missing, raises his arm to strike the barbarian who kneels at his feet, looking upwards.
The barbarian has his back turned to the viewer, and the Roman horseman leaps not directly to
the right but outward towards the audience, creating a strong sense of depth. Behind this pair,
another Roman horseman rushes to the right towards a bearded barbarian horseman, who raises
his sword to strike. Again, the barbarian has his back turned to the audience. Below the
barbarian’s horse is the crumpled body of a fallen barbarian. In the background, a barbarian flees
left. The next pair includes a barbarian, driving his spear up and to the right towards a Roman
horseman. This Roman twists to face his attacker to the left with his sword raised, though his
horse bounds to the right. A Roman soldier peeks out from behind this horse, standing over a
barbarian who kneels beside his fallen horse. The next figure to the right is clearly the focus of
138

the scene. A bearded man in full Roman military attire sits upon his horse. He flings his empty
right hand out and back behind him, causing his cape to flutter back and his chest to open out to
the viewer. The facial features, including his wrinkled brow and thick beard, are distinct, and he
most likely represents the deceased. He is rendered on a slightly larger scale than the other
figures. On the ground below his horse is a fallen barbarian wearing a tunic, who is similarly
unarmed and extends his left arm up in a sign of submission. Beside this pair, a Roman horseman
leaps to the right, preparing to strike the nude barbarian, whose back is turned to the viewer and
arm is raised with a spear. The head of a barbarian can be seen to the right of the Roman
horseman, looking up towards a Roman horseman. This soldier’s horse bounds to the left as he
raises his sword behind his head, an ovular shield in his left arm. A barbarian in in a tunic stands
below him, holding a spear towards a Roman horseman who leaps left. Behind the barbarian, the
rear of a horse can be seen on the ground, and before him sits the body of a barbarian wearing
trousers, who looks up at the Roman horseman. To the right, a barbarian horseman flees the
battle, looking back over his should at the ensuing action.
The bottom of this scene is dominated by barbarians who are falling and dying, but the
middle and upper parts of the scene have both Romans and barbarians. The Romans are all
shown in full uniform, while the barbarians either wear tunics or are nude. With the exception of
the slightly enlarged central figure, the figures in this scene are rendered on the same scale.
Though some empty space remains between the figures, the sculptor made use of flailing arms,
weapons, and cloaks to fill most of the space.
Ca. 180 CE

139

15. Palazzo Giustiniani Fragment, fig. 59
Marble. No dimensions published.
Galleria Giustiniani II, no. 71; Reinach 1912, p. 260, fig. 2; Matz-Duhn II, pp. 437-438, n. 3329;
Cossiga 1984, p. 233.
This sarcophagus fragment, now hanging on a wall in the Palazzo Giustiniani, represents
the left half of a battle scene. On the far left of the scene stand two barbarian captives, one male
and one female. The man stands with his hands crossed before him, and the female holds an
infant in her arms. A tropaeum stands behind the couple. To the right of the captives, the fight
begins with a Roman infantryman, who stands and raises his right arm over his head. He faces
off against a barbarian in a similar body position. Both men are turned so that their torsos face
the viewer in a forced frontal position. Between their legs, a shirtless barbarian lies upon the
ground along with his horse, a dramatic expression of pain on his face. Behind these men, a
Roman horseman strides to the right, with the head of another barbarian horseman barely visible
behind him, perhaps preparing to flee to the left. The Roman horseman appears to be pursuing a
barbarian horseman who strides before him. Below, a Roman soldier stands behind a barbarian
who is on his knees. The barbarian’s neck is bent back awkwardly to look up at his assailant, his
arm raised in supplication. To the right, the most prominent figure, who is rendered on a larger
scale than those who surround him, rides a horse which leaps to the right. In his right hand he
raises a spear, leaving his chest open to the viewer and his cloak billowing behind him. This
figure does not wear a cuirass, but instead wears a tunic and boots. Below him, two barbarians
have fallen to the ground. One struggles to clamber away, looking up towards this central figure,
while the other collapses, his back tuned to the viewer. Behind this main Roman horseman,
various Roman and barbarian horsemen and horses crowd the top of the scene. In the far right
corner, the face of a trumpeter is visible. This is where the scene breaks off.
140

The figures in this scene are mostly frontally positioned, with the exception of the two
barbarians at the bottom of the scene who show their backs to the viewer. The Romans in this
scene are all shown in full uniform, while the barbarians are almost all clothed or partially
clothed. The central figure appears to show portrait features, including his short cropped hair and
his pronounced jaw line. Empty space is non-existent in this scene, fill with flailing arms and
falling bodies.
End of the 2nd century CE

16. Portonaccio, fig. 60
Marble. H: 1.15 m. L: 2.39 m.
Museo Nazionale Romano (Palazzo Massimo alle Terme) Inv. 112327
Parabeni 1932, p. 344, no. 8; Rodenwaldt 1935, p. 25; Hamberg 1936, p. 44-46; Hamberg 1945,
pp. 176-179, pl. 40; Andreae 1956, p. 15, n. 13; Matz 1958, pp. 157-166, pl. 38; Kähler 1958,
pp. 322-324; Aurigemma 1963, p. 30, no. 52, pl. 14; Pelikán 1965, pp. 45-47; Brilliant 1967, fig.
49; Andreae 1969, pp. 157-159, fig. 7; Bandinelli 1970, no. 344-348; Andreae 1977, p. 312, fig.
503; Jung 1978, pp. 329-331, fig. 1; McCann 1978, p. 110; Schäfer 1979, p. 359; Kampen 1981,
pp. 47-58, pls. 10-11; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, pp. 107-110, pl. 76; Jung 1984, pp. 59-74;
Musso 1985, pp. 177-188; Amedick 1991, p. 151, no. 179; Kleiner 1992, p. 301; Krierer 1995,
pp. 96-98, cat. no. S 07, pls. 34-40; Reinsberg 1995, p. 357; La Regina 1998, pp. 162-165;
Elsner 1998, pp. 147-150; Ferris 2000, pp. 105-108; Wrede 2001, pl. 6.1; Krierer 2004, pp. 102106, Cat. 195, pl. 34.11; Landskron 2005, p. 69-74, pl. 6, fig. 25; Pardyová 2006, pp. 135-151;
Reinsberg 2006, pp. 24, 91-93, 217-220, cat. no. 85; Rivière 2008, pp. 170-171; Heitz 2009, pp.
217-220; Alexandrescu 2010, cat. no. P 38, pl. 34; Musso 2010, pp. 316-318; Töpfer 2011, pp.
130-132, cat. no. SD 53; Faust 2012, p. 197-202, pl. 77-78; Gasparri and Paris 2013, pp. 327330, no. 240.
Found in Portonaccio, Cave di Pietralata
This sarcophagus is framed on either side by tropaea. Below each of these stand two
barbarian captives, one male and one female. The female captives both wear long robs, and both

141

males, with beards and trousers, hold their hands crossed before them, a symbol of their
captivity. These captives and the tropaea are on a larger scale than the rest of the figures.
In the bottom left of the scene, the head and shoulders of a dead or dying barbarian can
be seen on the ground with his mouth open wide, and beside him a fallen horse. Kneeling above
them is a barbarian in trousers who holds a shield and spear, prepared to strike an unseen
opponent. To the right of this barbarian, a second barbarian wearing a tunic and trousers falls to
the ground. His body is bent over awkwardly, his left arm and knee touching the ground as his
right arm is bent upwards. A Roman soldier in full uniform stands above this falling barbarian,
his right arm drawn across his body as he prepares to strike his foe. In his left arm, he holds his
shield above his head. Above this pair and to the left, a Roman cavalryman in full scale armor
raises his spear to strike a barbarian to his left, a bearded man in a tunic who looks back at the
Roman, unable to defend himself. The Roman’s horse leaps forward, projecting out from the
scene. Above this soldier, another Roman infantryman can be seen, looking to his right. He is
partially obscured by a horse which bounds to the left, ridden by a bearded barbarian wearing a
tunic and trousers. This man holds a shield and looks towards the center of the scene, while
raising his right arm out and up. Below, a barbarian in a tunic and cape holds a spear and looks
concernedly towards a Roman horseman to his right, who raises his spear to attack. The rider
turns to the left, but his horse strides forward towards the viewer, turning its head to the right.
The Roman’s raised spear crosses in the air with the spear of the central figure. Behind these
spears, the head of a trumpeter with long hair can be seen in the background. To his right, a
barbarian, perhaps on horse, strides to the right while looking back to his left, where his comrade
gestures outwards. The central figure of the scene stands out clearly from the action. He is
rendered on a slightly larger scale than the surrounding figures, and his entire body, as well as

142

his horse’s, is completely unobscured by the surrounding chaos. With his right arm raised to hold
a spear, his chest is open to the viewer. His head focuses down upon his victim, a barbarian who
stands before his horse, wearing a tunic and trousers and raising his left arm in supplication. The
central figure wears a high-waisted cuirass, a fashion that was gaining popularity among Roman
officers by the time of Trajan, with a double skirt of pteruges, a sagum, pants, and an officer’s
helmet with crest. His sagum billows out behind him. Below the central figure, a Roman soldier
wearing lorica segmentata armor lunges to the left, plunging his sword into the neck of a
barbarian, who, wearing a tunic, falls face first from his horse. The Roman soldier stands behind
another barbarian falling from his horse. This man’s body is contorted so that this back faces the
viewer and his left leg is still raised up onto this horse. Only the rear of the horse is visible. The
head of another barbarian can be seen peeking up from behind the horse. Along the bottom of the
sarcophagus to the right of this group, a dead barbarian wearing a tunic and a dead horse can be
seen, crushed under the other figures, and the head of another barbarian who is being trampled.
To the right of the central figure, two Roman soldiers on horseback stride to the right, one
bearing a standard and the other a spear. Behind these men, a barbarian looks to the right. One of
Roman cavalryman looks down at a barbarian who stands before him. This barbarian wears a
tunic and trousers and raises his shield in defense, his spear drawn back. He turns to face the
Roman soldier, his back turned to the audience. There is a horse without a rider to his left. Below
this barbarian, a horse rears as his rider, a barbarian wearing a tunic and trousers, falls to the
ground on top of other barbarians. He looks up to his right, grasping the spear that a Roman
soldier is driving into his chest. Behind this Roman, a barbarian horseman projects forth. This
barbarian wears a tunic and a cape. He is raising his spear towards a Roman horseman who
cowers slightly below him. This Roman soldier also raises a weapon, now missing. The right

143

elbow of the barbarian horseman obscures the face of a Roman soldier who stands to his left,
wearing lorica segmentata. Two more Roman infantrymen stand in the background, facing to the
right. In the top right corner of the scene stands a barbarian horseman, wearing a tunic and a
cape. The man has his right arm raised and he faces to the left. His horse projects straight
forward, and he turns his head to the right. The right side of the scene is dominated by a Roman
horseman wearing scale armor, pants, and a baldric. He raises his spear over his head. The man
and his horse are turned so that their backs face the viewer. His target seems to be the barbarian
on the ground to his left. This barbarian wears only trousers. He sits with his back to the viewer,
his right hand holding a spear on the ground, while his left arms is raised in defense. Both the
Roman cavalryman and the barbarian are facing backwards, thus the perspective is nonsensical.
This sarcophagus is particularly tall, which allowed the sculptor to play with space in a unique
way. This scene has countless levels of figures.
Ca. 180-190 CE

17. Large Villa Doria Pamphili, fig. 61
Marble. No dimensions published.
Palazzo Doria
Matz-Duhn II n. 3319; Rodenwaldt 1935, pp. 24-25, pl. 8; Hamberg 1945, p. 176; Andreae 1956,
p. 15, no. 12; Brilliant 1967, pp. 227-230, fig. 70; Calza 1977, pp. 202-204, cat. no. 233, pls.
137-138; Krierer 1995, pp. 98-99, cat. no. S 08, pl. 41.142; Krierer 2004, cat. no. 198, pl. 38.4;
Landskron 2005, pp. 69-74, pl. 6, fig. 24; Alexandrescu 2010, cat. no. P 39.
On either side of this scene a male and female barbarian stand, with a child, below a
tropaeum. These figures are rendered on a much larger scale than those within the scene itself.
This sarcophagus shows a siege scene. A wall can be seen running through the center of the
sarcophagus. Along the top left of the scene, there are three Roman soldiers, all raising their
144

arms and leaning over the city wall. To the right of these three is a female, gesturing in a similar
fashion. Below this line of Romans, various men can be seen trying to climb the walls. At the
bottom left, a barbarian stands with his back turned to the viewer, his left arm raised. He seems
to look up towards the city wall. The broken body of a barbarian lies at his feet. Another
barbarian collapses over this man, and a third barbarian lies beside him. Behind these figures, a
Roman soldier grabs the arm of a barbarian. To the right of these figures, a Roman soldier
lunges to the left, his torso completely turned to the viewer. He creates a chiasmic composition
with the barbarian who lunges to the right, holding the collapsed body of one of his comrades.
Another barbarian lies at the feet of the Roman soldier. Behind him, a Roman cavalryman
projects out of the scene. Immediately to the right of this horseman, a larger Roman cavalryman
similarly projects from the scene. While his horse leaps to the right, it twists its head back to face
the left, creating the appearance of the creature protruding directly towards the viewer. The
commander sits awkwardly upon his horse, as he is too large for the creature and seemingly
floats off of its back, with his right arm raised to strike. He looks down, though his target is not
clear. Behind this Roman, other Roman cavalrymen charge to the right. Before the central figure
stands a barbarian who turns to look up at the commander, his arms raised in supplication. The
right half of this scene is dominated by another city wall. Here the scene becomes a jumbled
mass of limbs, as Roman soldiers toss barbarians from the top of the walls while other soldiers
attempt to climb up the walls. At the bottom right of the scene, a barbarian sits upon the ground
beside his fallen horse, looking up with a shocked expression towards the attack of the city.
All of the figures in this scene are fully clothed. No space is left empty, as it is filled in
with flailing limbs and falling bodies. Though space is not strictly divided between the two

145

opposing sides, the Roman cavalrymen seem to dominate the center of the scene. The central
horseman on this scene seems to be a portrait, as he has a beard, small nose, and pursed lips.
Ca. 190-200 CE

18. Large Ludovisi, fig. 62
Proconnesian Marble. H: 1.53 m. L: 2.73 m.
Palazzo Altemps inv. 8574
Helbig 1896, p. 123, n. 890; Reinach 1912, p. 331, fig. 1; Frothingham 1922, pp. 78-79;
Rodenwaldt 1929, pp. 61-68; Hamberg 1945, pp. 181-186, pl. 44; Andreae 1956, p. 16, cat. no.
17; von Heintze 1957, pp. 69-91, pl. 13; Brilliant 1963, pp. 186-187, fig. 4.64; Pelikán 1965, pp.
116-143; Reschke 1966, pp. 331-333; Pelikán 1965, pp. 116-118; Andreae 1968, pp. 633-635;
Andreae 1969, pp. 160-164; Aurigemma 1970, p. 95, no. 221, pl. 33; Jung 1978, p. 368, n. 110;
McCann 1978, p. 110; Fittschen 1979, pp. 581-584; Richter and Breckenridge 1982, p. 12, pl.
5.5; Koch and Sichtermann 1982, p. 92, pls. 77-78; Giuliano 1983, pp. 56-67, cat. no. 25; De
Lachenal 1983, pp. 56-67; Andreae 1992, p. 57; Krierer 1995, pp. 100-103, cat. no. S 10, pl. 4348; Reinsberg 1995, pp. 355-357; Gabelmann 1996, p. 34; Turcan 1999, p. 64, fig. 67; Ferris
2000, pp. 126-130; Wrede 2001, pl. 6.3; De Angelis D’Ossat 2002, pp. 218-221; Zanker and
Ewald 2004, p. 230; Krierer 2004, cat. no. 200, pl. 44.6; Landskron 2005, pp. 69-74, pl. 7, fig.
26; Muth 2005, pp. 272-286; Reinsberg 2006 p. 88, cat. no. 31; Heitz 2009, pp. 223-225; Künzl
2010; Alexandrescu 2010, pp. 99-103, cat. no. P 36, pl. 33; Töpfer 2011, pp. 153, 248, 383, cat.
no. SD 72; De Angelis D’Ossat 2011, pp. 240-243; Faust 2012, pp. 209-212, pls. 80-81.
This battle scene is centered upon a Roman horseman, who leaps to the right and raises
his right arm, his face and chest directed out towards the audience. His cape flows dramatically
behind him. His seated position on his horse is not possible, and is rendered in such a way to
show the man’s entire body at the cost of realism. His face bears clear portrait features, such as
his prominent brow and curly hair. On the left of the scene, a barbarian upon a fallen horse can
be seen peeking around the corner from the side of the sarcophagus. Next to him sits a barbarian
who attempts to cover his back with a shield. This man has been defeated and now cowers in the
corner. A tropaeum is shown on the top left corner of the scene. Here, a Roman soldier holding
146

the reigns of a horse strides right. In front of this man stands another Roman soldier. He raises
his shield to block an attack coming from a barbarian horseman, who stands behind the Roman.
The barbarian has his arm raised, prepared to strike. Just to the left of this barbarian is a Roman
trumpeter. Below this battle pair, a Roman soldier stands, holding the chin of a barbarian captive,
whose hands are crossed before him in a sign of submission. Another defeated barbarian peeks
out from behind this Roman. Under his feet, the crumpled body of a fallen barbarian is visible, as
well as a second barbarian who tries to crawl away. The head of a fallen horse is visible behind
this barbarian. A barbarian kneels above these fallen bodies, raising his shield to block the attack
of the Roman soldier who stands above him. To his right, a Roman horseman is visible. It is
unclear whether he is falling or attacking. Below the central figure, two crouching barbarians
look up in apparent awe and anguish. Two barbarians fall from their horses to the right. Above
the pair, a Roman soldier raises his sword to strike an unseen enemy, and the head of a second
Roman can be seen to his right. A Roman horseman strides to the right behind these Roman
soldiers, parallel to the central figure. He raises a spear to strike a standing barbarian, who wears
trousers and turns his back to the viewer. A trumpeter stands to the right of this pair, framed by
the arch of the instrument with his cheeks puffed. On the far right side of the scene, three Roman
soldiers stand, one behind the other. The lowest Roman holds the hair of and prepares to strike a
nude barbarian who sits at this feet. Behind his right shoulder and somewhat hidden in the
shadows of the scene is the face of another barbarian. A tropaeum is shown on the top right
corner of the sarcophagus.
No space is left empty in this scene, as every inch is filled with garments and shields. All
of the figures within the scene are clothed, and this drapery adds to the confusion and clutter of

147

the scene. The battle is made more dramatic by the exaggerated expressions on the faces of the
Romans, barbarians, and even the horses.
Mid-3rd century CE

148

Images

Fig. 1: Grave stele of Dexileos, after Eliopoulos 2009, p. 22, fig. 16.

Fig. 2: Hadrianic hunting scene, after Ferris 2013, fig. 16.
149

Fig. 3: Alexander Sarcophagus battle scene, after Pasinli 1997, pp. 14-15.

Fig. 3a: Alexander Sarcophagus Detail

Fig. 4: Athena group from the Altar of Zeus at Pergamon, after Schmidt 1962, pl. 10.
150

Fig. 5: Moirai group from the Altar of Zeus at Pergamon, after Schmidt 1962, pl. 35.

Fig. 6: Leto and Apollo group from the Altar of Zeus at Pergamon, after Schmidt 1962, pls. 13-14.
151

Fig. 7: Artemis and Hecate group from the Altar of Zeus at Pergamon, after Schmidt 1962, pls. 15.

Fig. 8: Lesser Attalid Group, after Stewart 2004, p. 2, fig. 1.

152

Fig. 9: Dying Gaul, after Stewart 2004, p. 14, fig. 28.

Fig. 10: Venice Falling Gaul, after Stewart 2004, p. 41, fig. 53.

153

Fig. 11: Venice Kneeling Gaul, after Stewart 2004, p. 37, fig. 49.

Fig. 12: Venice Dying Gaul, after Stewart 2004, p. 44, fig. 57.

154

Fig. 13: Ludovisi Gaul, after Stewart 2004, p. 15, fig. 27.

Fig. 14: Amazon falling from her horse, after Gasparri 2009, p. 362, pl. 82.
155

Fig. 15: Amazon fighting a Gaul, after Giuliano 1979, p. 163, no. 111.

Fig. 16: Alexander Mosaic, after Cohen 1997, fig. 1.
156

Fig. 17: Column of Trajan scene XXIV, after Coarelli 2000, p. 67, pl. 23.

Fig. 18: Column of Trajan scene XXXIX, after Coarelli 2000, p. 84, pl. 40.
157

Fig. 19: Column of Trajan scene LXIV, after Coarelli 2000, p. 112, pl. 68.

Fig. 20: Column of Trajan scene CXII, after Coarelli 2000, p. 180, pl. 136.
158

Fig. 21: Column of Trajan scene LXXI, after Coarelli 2000, p. 125, pl. 81.

Fig. 22: Great Trajanic Frieze, after Faust 2012, pl. 2.
159

Fig. 23: Column of Marcus Aurelius scene XCII, after Coarelli 2008, p. 298.

Fig. 24: Column of Marcus Aurelius scene LXXIX, after Coarelli 2008, p. 275.
160

Fig. 25: Column of Marcus Aurelius scene LXI, after Coarelli 2008, p. 236.

Fig. 26: Column of Marcus Aurelius scene L, after Coarelli 2008, p. 214.
161

Fig. 27: Column of Marcus Aurelius scene CIX, after Coarelli 2008, p. 331.

Fig. 28: Arch of Septimius Severus panel III, after Brilliant 1967, pl. 60a.
162

Fig. 29: Arch of Septimius Severus panel I, after Brilliant 1967, pl. 76a.

163

Fig. 30: Roman Horseman

Fig. 31: Falling Barbarian A

Fig. 32: Falling Barbarian B

Fig. 33: Falling Barbarian C

Fig. 34: Turning Barbarian

164

Fig. 35: Dallas Museum Circle

Fig. 36: Small Campo Santo Circle

Fig. 37: Collapsing Horse

Fig. 38: Fleeing Barbarian

Fig. 39: Execution Group

Fig. 40: Trumpeter

165

Fig. 41: Cowering Barbarian

Fig. 42: Central Commander A

Fig. 43: Central Commander B

Fig. 44: Central Commander C

166

Fig. 45: Ammendola Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 24, fig. 83.

Fig. 46: Dallas Museum Sarcophagus, after Dallas Museum of Art 2012, pp. 144-145.

167

Fig. 47: Small Villa Doria Pamphili Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 33, fig. 119.

Fig. 48: Via Tiburtina Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 28, fig. 99.

Fig. 49: Small Ludovisi Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 31, fig. 109.
168

Fig. 50: Concordia University Sarcophagus, after Francis 2000, pl. 1.

Fig. 51: Small Campo Santo Sarcophagus, after Arias, Cristiani, Gabba 1977, pl. 15.

Fig. 52: Badia di Farfa Sarcopahgus, after Faust 2012, pl. 74.

169

Fig. 53: Badia di Cava Sarcophagus, after Russenberger 2015, p. 334, fig. 151.

Fig. 54: Palazzo Giustiniani Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 33, fig. 118.

Fig. 55: Sketch of Ince Blundell Sarcophagus, after Bieńkowski 1908, pl. 7a.

170

Fig. 56: Large Campo Santo Sarcophagus, after Rodenwaldt 1935, pl. 9.

Fig. 57: Villa Borghese Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 41, fig. 143.

171

Fig. 58: Palermo Sarcophagus, after Brilliant 1963, fig. 4.63.

Fig. 59: Palazzo Giustiniani Fragment, after Cossiga 1984, p. 233.

172

Fig. 60: Portonaccio Sarcophagus, after Faust 2012, pl. 77.

Fig. 61: Large Villa Doria Pamphili Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 41, fig. 142.

173

Fig. 62: Large Ludovisi Sarcophagus, after Krierer 1995, pl. 43, fig. 149.

Fig. 63: Vatican Amazonomachy Sarcophagus, after Grassinger 1999, pl. 98.1.

174

Fig. 64: Mantua Amazonomachy Sarcophagus, after Grassinger 1999, pl. 99.1.

Fig. 65: Grassinger’s Amazon Group F, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.

Fig. 66: Grassinger’s Amazon Group G, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.
175

Fig. 67: Grassinger’s Amazon Group H2, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.

Fig. 68: Grassinger’s Amazon Group E, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.

176

Fig. 69: Grassinger’s Amazon Groups N and O, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.

Fig. 70: Grassinger’s Amazon Group B, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.

Fig. 71: Grassinger’s Gefellene R, W, and S, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.
177

Fig. 72: Grassinger’s Gefellene P, Q, and X, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.

Fig. 73: Grassinger’s Tubicen Y, after Grassinger 1999, fig. 1.

Fig. 74: Capitoline Museum Amazonomachy Sarcophagus, after Grassinger 1999, pl. 91.1.
178

Fig. 75: Amazonomachy from Temple of Bassae Frieze, after Mallwitz 1975, p. 75, pl. 15.534.

Fig. 76: Boar-hunting Sarcophagus from Centrale Montemartini, after Russell 2013, p. 287, fig. 7.15.

179

Fig. 77: Campania Endymion Sarcophagus, after Elsner 1998, p. 153, fig. 101.

Fig. 78: Vatican Achilles and Penthesilea Sarcophagus, after Grassinger 1999, pl. 111.3.

180

