I, (Post)Human: Being and Subjectivity in
the Quest to Build Artificial People
A dissertation submitted to the Graduate
School of the University of Cincinnati in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
degree of

Doctor of Philosophy

in the Department of German Studies
of the College of Arts and Sciences

by Alex Hogue
M.A. University of Kentucky
May 2010

ii
Committee Chair: Todd Herzog, Ph.D.

Abstract
Questions of whether consciousness is beholden to the context in which it experiences the
world or not form the central debate about the nature of human life within discourses of posthumanism.
Drawing on the wealth of science fiction media, theorists such as Scott Bukatman, and N. Katherine
Hayles each make differing arguments about the direction humanity is heading in its ever-increasing
convergence with advanced technology. While Bukatman’s position calls for a redefinition of the subject
and subjective consciousness in the face of a changing technological world, Hayles’ focus on
embodiment as the groundwork of existence refutes what she sees as the technological nightmares in
Bukatman and his analysis of cyberpunk. However, this conflict did not begin in the late twentieth
century; rather my work will argue that this debate, and indeed posthumanism as a whole, have their
roots in the works of the German Idealists as they reacted against Kant and the Enlightenment.
Specifically, I will trace the roots of Bukatman’s argument to Fichte and his First Principle of Philosophy
that grounds all subjectivity. Next I will trace the work of Hayles, who reacts directly against Bukatman
in How We Became Posthuman to Hölderlin, who in his essay “Being and Judgement” reacts directly
against Fichte’s First Principle and the idea that consciousness is independent of corporeal being.
Through this analysis I will demonstrate the extremely widespread, but heretofore unacknowledged
influence German Idealism has had, and continues to have, on contemporary culture and its
relationship with technology.

Acknowledgements
This dissertation would not have been possible without the unending and generous support of
my advisor, Todd Herzog, and the rest of my committee, Tanja Nusser, Valerie Weinstein, and
Evan Torner. Todd’s ability to rephrase my jumbled ideas into coherent thoughts, Tanja’s
continual challenge for me to analyze (and reanalyze) my presuppositions, Valerie’s attention
to detail in argument structure, and Evan’s dedication to helping me streamline and restructure
my thoughts were all vital contributions to the success of this project. Further thanks are due to
the Taft Research Center at the University of Cincinnati and to the DAAD for providing funding
for my work.
Additionally, I would not have been able to complete this project without the support of my
family. They listened to me explain, rework, and reexplain my ideas more times than I can
count, and more times than they likely wanted to.
Lastly, I want to thank Simone and our three cats: Minerva, Pickles, and Bellamy. They were
always there for me to bounce ideas off of, to chat about (and introduce me to new) science
fiction, and to keep me company while writing.

i

Contents
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER 1: PERCEIVING OR BEING? - PROMETHEUS, POSTHUMANISM, AND A TWO-HUNDRED YEAR ARGUMENT .......... 5
POSTHUMANISM: GROUNDING BEING AND DOWNLOADING MINDS .................................................................................................... 13
DASEIN AND PHENOMENOLOGY: A MODERNIST TAKE ON THE DEBATE ................................................................................................. 23
I AM I, OR MAYBE I’M JUST DISTANCED FROM MY ABSOLUTE BEING: .................................................................................................. 40
IDEALISM AND ROMANTICISM....................................................................................................................................................... 40
CONCLUSION............................................................................................................................................................................. 53
CHAPTER 2: MIND OVER MATTER ...................................................................................................................................... 55
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................................................... 55
ROMANTICISM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 60
Der Sandmann (1817) ...................................................................................................................................................... 63
Frankenstein (1818) ......................................................................................................................................................... 71
MODERNISM............................................................................................................................................................................. 81
Das Wachsfigurenkabinett (1924) .................................................................................................................................... 84
Metropolis (1927) ............................................................................................................................................................. 93
POSTHUMANISM...................................................................................................................................................................... 102
Star Trek ......................................................................................................................................................................... 106
The Mass Effect Trilogy .................................................................................................................................................. 121
CHAPTER 3: THE ONTOLOGISTS STRIKE BACK .................................................................................................................. 146
ROMANTICISM ........................................................................................................................................................................ 152
“Die Automata” (1819)................................................................................................................................................... 156
Frankenstein (1819) ....................................................................................................................................................... 171
MODERN AND CONTEMPORARY ONTOLOGICAL POSTHUMANISM ...................................................................................................... 181
Battlestar Galactica Universe (1978-2013) .................................................................................................................... 185
Her (2014) ...................................................................................................................................................................... 202
CONCLUSION........................................................................................................................................................................... 214
EPILOGUE - IS THERE ANY HOPE FOR POSTHUMANISM? ................................................................................................. 215
WORKS CITED .................................................................................................................................................................. 220

1

Introduction
There exists today a fundamental problem within Posthumanism1 and science fiction
and the philosophical goals they aim to achieve. As science fiction imagines the possibilities of
future beings and worlds, it grounds these imaginings not in the ideals of the contemporary
world as much as it participates in the circular and reactionary intellectual discourse of postEnlightenment era Germany. While the two-hundred-year separation of the German Idealists
and Romantics from today's incredibly complex array of transmedial universes that include
Star Trek, Battlestar Galactica, The Mass Effect Trilogy and many others may seem to insulate
the latter from the former, the opposite is actually true. One of the main driving conflicts, if not
the main conflict, that unites the disparate science fiction works across contemporary media is
the question of how human existence relates to the technology that humans produce. While
this debate is often seen as a contemporary issue rooted in the technologies of the Digital Age,
the philosophical conflict that drives this discourse stems directly from the conflict between the
German Idealists and the Romantics, specifically from Fichte and Hölderlin, and has mutated
over the last two hundred years to incorporate the real and imagined technologies of each
epoch.
The discourse that drives Posthumanist science fiction is namely one between those
holding an epistemological view of existence and those holding an ontological view. The
epistemologists see human existence as a primarily mental activity that is not tied in any
1 While the range of definitions of Posthumanism encompasses such diverse fields as animal studies, science
fiction, robotics, computer science and philosophy, my usage of it will integrate to ways of being post
human(ist). First, I will be looking at philosophy after Enlightenment Humanism, and thus post-Humanist.
Second I will be focusing on the constructions of artificial humans in media as beings that come after biological
life.

2
particular way to the human body or earthly existence it has. One's subjective self may very
well exist within a hard drive as easily as it exists within a brain and the transfer between the
two is only limited by our current technology. The ontologists, on the other hand, see a
complex interrelationship between the mind, body, and earth that cannot be sundered. This
side argues that while humans may overcome their humanness to become posthuman, this
progress will always be faithful to the mind-body-earth unity.
It is not in itself a problem that Posthumanism and science fiction are attempting to
solve an argument that has plagued Western philosophy for two hundred years. However, as
Posthumanism and science fiction are all but synonymous in contemporary culture, the deeply
Humanist roots of this debate present problems for the claim that Posthumanism has actually
succeeded Humanism in any way. While Ihab Hassan attempted to ground Posthumanism in
the symbol of Prometheus,2 his calls for unity and synthesis for this epistemological-ontological
debate fell on deaf ears and the overwhelming majority of science fiction and Posthumanist
theories since Hassan's “Prometheus as Performer” in 1976 have served only to perpetuate
the same circle of argumentation between the two sides. If Posthumanism is to be a real
possibility, that is to say if humanity can overcome the hindrances still lingering from
Enlightenment Humanism, this Humanistic line of debate will first have to be overcome.
In the following three chapters, I will outline this debate as it exists in the theoretical
world (chapter 1), and then examine each side in depth as epistemological theories are
reflected and perpetuated in media (chapter 2) and as ontological ideas follow suit (chapter 3).
I have structured chapter one starting with the present and moving backwards in time to show
a broader perspective and illustrate how we have arrived at this place in our discourse, but
2

Discussed in detail in the next chapter.

3
have chosen to move from the past towards the present in chapters two and three to show the
evolution of ideas and the influence they have had on subsequent thinkers. Finally, in the
epilogue, I briefly investigate one contemporary film that attempts to be faithful to Hassan's
Prometheus.
The structure I create looks at the beginnings of different technological ages as they
correspond with new schools of philosophical thought and begin to manipulate the
epistemological-ontological debate to fit the new epoch. It is perhaps not coincidence that each
epoch finds itself situated around the change of century. These times not only mark an end
and beginning on a calendar, they (Romanticism/Idealism, Modernism, Posthumanism) mark
apocalyptic shifts away from the old and toward the new and technological advanced. As
would be expected, however, unsolved problems, such as the distinction between mind and
body, permeate and warp the excitement of change and prevent the achievement of the
desired progress.
In choosing works to illustrate the evolution of this Posthumanist debate, I opted to
include some canonical works within German Studies and beyond including Der Sandmann,
Frankenstein, and Metropolis in order to illustrate how these ideas are at once central to our
understanding of humans' relationships to technology and how this debate has persisted and
evolved while remaining hidden in plain sight. I chose to focus on the new medium of each
time period (literature, film, television, and video games) in an effort to demonstrate how the
epistemological-ontological question maintains itself in the forward-looking medium of each
age. In structuring my research in this way, a number of unfortunate omissions had to be
made. Blade Runner, for example, serves as a fantastic intertext and incorporates ideas from
both the epistemological and ontological camps; however, the analysis of it by Scott Bukatman

4
and Katherine Hayles both stand as excellent examples illustrating the thought of each side
and I would only be reiterating their arguments by tackling it directly. Other works, including
Lawnmower Man, TRON, and The Matrix have also each received much attention from
scholars. My choices of texts to include and omit are 1) designed to demonstrate both that this
discourse is ingrained in the popular and scholarly thought of each age, 2) to mark the medial
and technological shift that comes with each new age, and 3) to demonstrate the breadth of
applicability of my analysis within Posthumanism and science fiction with internationally
renowned works such as Star Trek, Battlestar Galactica, Her, and Mass Effect.

5

Chapter 1: Perceiving or Being? - Prometheus, Posthumanism, and a
Two-Hundred Year Argument
As both a movement in media and a cultural concept, posthumanism is surrounded by a
panoply of variations regarding its definition, agenda, and focus. While the myriad writers who
discuss the topic directly or engage with posthuman(ist)3 themes in literature, film, and video
games often produce works that vary greatly in their understandings of the concept, finding
common ground between them proves a rather easy task, so long as one focuses on the
premises and assumptions of the authors and not their given responses. The similarities
between these presuppositions and the disunity of the answers, as well as the difficulty in
pinning down a single salient definition of the concept, recall the emergence of posthumanism
as outlined by Ihab Hassan from his seminal essay “Prometheus as Performer: Toward a
Posthumanist Culture?” Hassan writes:
We need to understand that the human form—including human desire and all its
external representations—may be changing radically, and thus must be revisioned. We need to understand that five hundred years of humanism may be
coming to an end, as humanism transforms itself into something that we must
helplessly call posthumanism. (843)
Hassan’s essay was originally given as a keynote address for the International
Symposium on Postmodern Performance in 1976 and, displaying a complex commentary on
the gathering, his text is structured as a classical five-act play in which various styles of writing

3

The terminology surrounding posthumanism is not always consistent from author to author, which I will
discuss in the coming pages.

6
interact with one another as characters in their own right. 4 The helplessness he describes in
trying to ascertain how, or even if, humanism may be coming to an end is spoken by Text in
the fourth scene entitled “The Future of the Vitruvian Man.” Following a Foucauldian model of
archaeology, and with the image of the Vitruvian Man representing humanism, Hassan
contrasts the “arms and legs defining the measure of things, so marvelously drawn by
Leonardo” with the human in the Space Age “[the Vitruvian Man] has broken through its
enclosing circle and square, and spread across the cosmos” (843). Hassan's difficulty in
describing exactly what this new era after humanism will entail shows a further Foucauldian
model of epistemic progression. Hassan is confident that a shift is occurring but unsure where
culture will end up. Through the performance enacted by his various textual characters it
becomes clear that he is interested not only in the cultural progress into this period after
humanism, but also in its cultural roots, since even if the movement is understood as posthuman in the sense of a Nietzschean overcoming of the human, posthumanism does not arise
from a culture alien to humans.5
The above quoted passage from Hassan's essay is easily the most referenced portion
of his text among subsequent writers on posthumanism, appearing in the Introduction to Neil
Badmington's edited volume Posthumanism, in N. Katherine Hayles' book How We Became
Posthuman and others.6 While this passage sums up the cultural precipice that is most often

4

His character list includes Pretext, Mythotext, Text, Heterotext, Context, Metatext, Posttext, and Paratext.
Next to each name is outlined the motivation or goal of each character/style of writing.
5
Nietzsche would likely agree with Hassan that the name posthumanism is wholly inadequate.
Understanding and labelling something by what it is not is indicative of slave morality and therefore foreign to the
Übermensch.

6

While my central argument is that posthumanist themes have much deeper cultural and philosophical
roots than the movement often acknowledges, it will not be possible to thoroughly discuss every influential thinker
leading up to posthumanism. In focusing on major milestones in the epistemological-ontological debate, namely
the advent of its current form in German idealism and romanticism, its reevaluation in modernism and

7
cited as the genesis of posthumanism, the work as a whole can be seen as a prescient
manifesto for the subsequent works detailing the movement after the decline of humanism's
five hundred year reign. While the passage speculating on the end of five hundred years of
humanism is relatively well known, the rest of the work is often overlooked by scholars. In the
sentences before the oft-cited passage, Hassan acknowledges that posthumanism "may
appear variously as a dubious neologism [or] the latest slogan..." but that it also may "hint at a
tendency struggling to become more than a trend" (843). The legacy of Hassan's essay is an
ironic one, in that only this rather bold claim about the end of humanism has been removed
from its context to function as the latest slogan to those in favor of the posthumanist change
and a dubious neologism to those against it. Even though many later scholars have overlooked
the rest of the work, the ideas contained therein anticipate the whole of the debate around
posthumanism, a claim which I shall demonstrate through the rest of this chapter.
Hassan does not only reference other cultural theorists,7 rather he preempts Donna
Haraway, Scott Bukatman, and N. Katherine Hayles in acknowledging the cultural role of
science fiction, represented in his essay by the uncanny computer HAL in Kubrick's 2001: A
Space Odyssey (1968) as well as the real-world work in artificial intelligence that Kubrick's
character portrays. The analysis of science fiction to describe posthumanism has become
standard procedure by authors such as Bukatman, Haraway, and Hayles in the three and a
half decades since Hassan's address was given. Through his analysis of real-world and
science fiction culture, Hassan engages topics such as consciousness and the philosophy of
mind, physical embodiment, mechanical versus digital technologies, space travel, the unity of
contemporary incarnation in posthumanism, many notable and influential theorists will unfortunately be relegated
to honorable mentions in footnotes.
7
Derrida, Hegel, Marx, Monod, Chardin, Freud, Sartre, Lévi-Strauss, Heidegger, Husserl, C.P. Snow, F.R.
Leavis, and many others.

8
opposites in the figure of the cyborg and in general, cloning, androids, as well as the perceived
struggle between humans, human nature, and technology thereby linking the realms of fiction
and reality as equal players in the cultural consciousness.
Bukatman and Hayles published their works in 1993 and 1999 respectively,
demonstrating that within the debate on posthumanism being-centric ideas arise in response to
those centered on consciousness. This pattern will re-occur through the rest of this chapter as
I trace the influences of Bukatman and Hayles back through Modernism and into German
Idealism. Hayles’ approach in How We Became Posthuman is extremely Heideggerian, while
Bukatman makes several mentions of Heidegger’s professor Edmund Husserl directly, as well
as makes use of his phenomenological method. Furthering my analysis of the pattern is
Bukatman’s core claim of the need for a reimagined subject, which brings Johann Gottlieb
Fichte’s First Philosophical Principles into the contemporary age. Shortly after Fichte published
his ideas in Die Wissenschaftslehre, Friedrich Hölderlin published a short essay entitled “Sein
und Urteil” in which he refutes Fichte’s idealist notions and claims that the physical union of
mind and body in the world is truly the most fundamental part of the human experience. 8
Since Hassan’s text, and despite “Prometheus’s” attempt at unification, theorists in
posthumanism have resurrected and adapted older divisions between epistemologically and
ontologically centered understandings of existence to fit the new technologies and conditions
of existence of the posthumanist age. Scott Bukatman, who calls for a newly reimagined
subject in his book Terminal Identity, typifies the contemporary epistemological viewpoint by
arguing that in response to humanity’s rapidly evolving technological creations and abilities,
the conscious subject must also be reimagined and redefined to keep pace with technology.
8

Heidegger lectured on many of Hölderlin’s works and Husserl on Fichte’s.

9
He explores the possibilities of mind-uploading, and immortal, computer-based
consciousnesses as they appear in science fiction and as real technology advances toward the
possibility of producing such an achievement.9 Opposing Bukatman and representing the
ontological camp is N. Katherine Hayles, who refers to the idea of uploading minds into a
computer as a nightmare in her book How We Became Posthuman. For Hayles the primary
element of the human experience is our physical embodiment in finite, organic bodies. Both
Bukatman’s Terminal Identity and Hayles’ How We Became Posthuman reference Donna
Haraway’s essay “A Cyborg Manifesto,” and both are influenced by Haraway’s ideas.
Haraway’s essay attempts to undermine such dichotomous thinking as either consciousness or
being and while she succeeds to some degree, she maintains a belief in materialism
throughout the essay. While her efforts begin to blur the lines between the two camps, her
focus remains closer to the side of being than that of consciousness.
Following Hassan's essay by roughly a decade, Donna Haraway's "A Cyborg Manifesto"
draws on the ubiquitous bio-mechanical hybrid from science fiction to illustrate her goal of
building an "ironic political myth faithful to feminism, socialism, and materialism" (149). In her
words, the cyborg is "a hybrid of machine and organism, a creature of social reality as well as
a creature of science fiction. ... Contemporary science fiction is full of cyborgs - creatures
simultaneously animal and machine, who populate worlds ambiguously natural and crafted"
(149). While she neither cites Hassan nor mentions the word posthumanism in the entirety of
her collection of essays Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature, strong
similarities are to be found between the two texts.
9

The influence of Putnam’s “brain in a vat” thought experiment and Ryle’s “ghost in the machine” serve to
link the contemporary work of Bukatman and Hayles with modernist arguments from Husserl and Heidegger,
through whom the Enlightenment thought of Descartes and his critics in German idealism are reworked for the
context of the 20th century.

10
Haraway's ironic political myth mirrors the interplay between Hassan’s characters Text,
Mythotext, and Context regarding the symbolism of the Promethean myth in Hassan's essay.
"Irony," in Haraway's definition, "is about contradictions that do not resolve into larger wholes,
even dialectically, about the tension of holding incompatible things together because both or all
are necessary and true" (149). The cyborg for Haraway is a metaphor for rethinking
preconceived and fossilized categories of understanding - its purpose is to undermine thinking
in terms of "either-or" and replace it with "both-and." While Haraway chooses a symbol for this
unity of opposites that is forward-looking and based in science fiction, Hassan’s choice of
symbol for what is in essence the same concept looks backwards to Greek mythology.10
As the character of Mythotext in Hassan's essay describes, Prometheus is both a thief
and redeemer - two ordinarily mutually exclusive characteristics that are both equally essential
to Prometheus' function in mythology and as a metaphor for posthumanism. Mythotext then
quotes Socrates from the "Philebus" stating "'the gift of the gods . . . which they let fall from
their abode, and it was through Prometheus, or one like him, that it reached mankind, ...
together with a fire exceeding bright.' This gift is a perception that 'all things consist of a one
and a many, and have in their nature a conjunction of limit and unlimitedness.' Thus the One
and the Many enter Western thought" (Hassan 832). The character Text responds in
acknowledgement, but takes it a step further:
There are poets and philosophers, scientists and mystics, who lead us to expect
more. They believe in some richer relation between the one and the many, the
universal and the concrete. ... Like Whitman, they sing of an 'orbic vision,' in

10

As these forward- and backward-looking symbols unintentionally create a dichotomy, perhaps the most
appropriate symbol for posthumanism would be a gender-ambiguous, self-created, cyborg Prometheus,.

11
which the inner divisions of consciousness and the external divisions of
humankind are healed and made whole - made whole but not homogeneous,
healed but not rendered uniform. (833)
In his description of the unity of opposites, Hassan takes care not to blend them into a new
whole in which each component part loses its individual character. The Promethean
representation of thief and redeemer, as well as the accompanying metaphor of the marriage
between the Earth and the Sky, maintains what Haraway will refer to as irony in her image of
the cyborg. In the fifth and final act of "Prometheus as Performer," Hassan again has Text
agree with, but step beyond, a lesson relayed by Mythotext.
Calm yourself, Mythotext, I concur, I freely concede the point. Obviously, the
marriage of the Earth and the Sky may never find a happy consummation. It may
also beget monsters and mutants. We know all too well the litany of our failures .
. . Others caution of present and 'future shock'; of cloning, parthenogenesis,
transplants, prosthesis; of the alteration of memory, intelligence, and behavior; of
the creation of chimeras, androids, and cyborgs. (848)
In elaborating on her cyborg figure, Haraway calls the late twentieth century "our time, a
mythic time" (150). Despite being referenced in a previous essay of her book, the myth of
Prometheus does not factor in to her ironic myth of the cyborg. It is evident, however, that the
cultural trajectory outlined by Hassan was also apparent to Haraway in the mid 1980s as both
Prometheus and the cyborg are figures emerging from their respective cultural imaginations as
representations of the questions their human creators are struggling with. While Prometheus,
as Mythotext reminds Text through the words of Socrates, taught humankind about the one

12
and the many, Haraway's cyborg removes the distinction between the two concepts in a new
and unresolved, but mutually necessary, combination of two. Taking the cyborg one step
further, and removing the separation between the mythic world and the human world (i.e. the
realms of fiction and fact), she writes "we are all chimeras, theorized and fabricated hybrids of
machine and organism; in short we are cyborgs. ... The cyborg is a condensed image of both
imagination and material reality, the two joined centres structuring any possibility of historical
transformation" (150). By removing the separation between the mythic world and the real
world, Haraway seems to be continuing her quest to combat dichotomous representations and
simultaneously giving a nod to perspectives such as Hassan’s which attempt to re-integrate
older representations of this thinking into the contemporary age.
The two crucial arguments of Haraway's text function to expand the metaphor of the
cyborg further into real life. Her first argument is against the production of a universal, totalizing
theory because it is just those grandiose ideas that limit the possibilities embodied in the
cyborg itself. Her second argument refuses an anti-science metaphysics in favor of more fluid
understandings of both. Here again, Haraway furthers an idea brought up in Hassan's essay.
At the end of the second scene, Metatext appears with the intention of summarizing the ideas
of posthumanism thus far. Of the five points he elaborates, it is the fifth that Haraway's
arguments fall into accord with "because both imagination and science are agents of change,
crucibles of values, modes not only of representation but also of transformation, their interplay
may now be the vital performing principle in culture and consciousness - a key to
Posthumanism" (Hassan 838).
While both theorists make incredibly cogent arguments based on mutually observed
shifts in culture, their works do not run completely parallel. Hassan's text takes at times a

13
metaphysical focus and at others promotes clearly idealist viewpoints,11 whereas Haraway's
cyborg theory explicitly favors materialism. However, even her materialism is not the exclusive
variety of Descartes' res extensa, which, along with res cogitans was "settled by a dialectical
progeny, called spirit or history" (152). Haraway's materialism attempts to incorporate this LeftHegelian influence into a technologically, and bodily, focused world.

Posthumanism: Grounding Being and Downloading Minds
Following the publication of Haraway's Simians, Cyborgs, and Women by a decade and
a half, N. Katherine Hayles' book How We Became Posthuman continues the discussion of a
few elements from both Hassan and Haraway, but spends most of the book discussing ideas
from other theorists and trends in posthumanism, science fiction, and the hard science of
cybernetics. Hayles starts the first chapter of her book with the aforementioned quote from
Hassan's essay regarding the end of five hundred years of humanism, but seems to ignore the
rest of his essay taking the end of humanism simply as her starting point and then moving on
(Hayles 1). Her discussion of the inseparability of the material substrate from the information it
contains would provide an enriching addition to Hassan's metaphor of Prometheus as an
inseparable union, especially as it pertains to Mary Shelley's Frankenstein: A Modern
Prometheus, however Hayles does not choose to follow this line of inquiry.
One overlap that Hayles and Hassan share is the philosophy of Martin Heidegger. In the
fifth and final act of Hassan's work, the character of Text turns the discussion to an interview
with Heidegger published in Der Spiegel. Heidegger claims that "technology is no longer
11

I will return to Hassan's idealism in my analysis of other theorists.

14
empowered by human reality ... it no longer corresponds to the human measure or way" 12 (qtd.
in Hassan 848-849).13 With this Heidegger is building a point about the nature and function of
technology in the current age. "Der Mensch ist gestellt, beansprucht und herausgefordert von
einer Macht, die im Wesen der Technik offenbar wird und die er selbst nicht beherrscht. ... Die
Philosophie ist am Ende (Heidegger, "Gott"). Heidegger's point seems to be that the
destruction of all metaphysics that he set as one of his goals in 1927's Sein und Zeit has been
achieved, although not by his or anyone else's philosophy, rather it is the trans-disciplinary
realm of hard and soft sciences studying the physical world that has taken over for speculative
metaphysics in the modern world. The interviewer from Der Spiegel asks Heidegger "Und wer
nimmt den Platz der Philosophie jetzt ein?" to which Heidegger laments "Die Kybernetik."
Cybernetics, the development of self-"steering" and self-regulating systems is exactly
the starting point for Hayles in How We Became Posthuman. Heidegger's view of cybernetics
seems to be that the cybernetic technology already has too great a distance between it and
humans really to be an expression of Dasein's essence anymore. At the same time, it has
taken with it the questions of metaphysics regarding consciousness, the self, and human
essence and directed them toward an artificially created system. Using cybernetics to create
mechanical life14 is, as Haraway and others have noted, a common theme in science fiction
and through this cybernetic life, works of science fiction explore the meaning, nature, and even
existence of the human essence. For Hayles, this is the beginning of her nightmare, as she
calls it. In the first chapter of her book, "Toward an Embodied Virtuality," and after the leading

12

"Die Technik in ihrem Wesen ist etwas, was der Mensch von sich aus nicht bewältigt ... wir haben noch
keinen Weg, der dem Wesen der Technik entspricht."

13
14

The interview Hassan is referring to can be found reprinted online.
The character Data from Star Trek: The Next Generation is a prime example of this in fiction.

15
quote from Hassan, Hayles discusses the passage in Hans Moravec's Mind Children in which
he argues that it will soon be possible to upload15 human consciousness into a computer.
Hayles responds unequivocally "Even assuming such a separation was possible, how could
anyone think that consciousness in an entirely different medium would remain unchanged, as if
it had no connection with embodiment?" (Hayles 1). Hayles is clearly continuing a line of
thinking from Heidegger's Sein und Zeit in which Being, that is the embodied existence of
Dasein in-the-world, is the most fundamental part of the human experience. Similar to
Heidegger, she also considers the end of the "liberal humanist subject" as it has existed in a
Cartesian duality of res cogitans and res extensa since the 17th century, however where
Heidegger planned in his proposed, but never written, second volume of Sein und Zeit to
dismantle the idea once and for all, Hayles believes it has already happened and it is her task
to trace the path that has brought humanity to have already "become posthuman."
In her analysis of the problematic ideas raised by cybernetics, cyberpunk, and
posthumanism itself, Hayles identifies four points that characterize the current popular answer
to the question "what is the posthuman?" She writes:
First the posthuman view privileges informational pattern over material
instantiation, so that embodiment in a biological substrate is seen as an accident
of history rather than an inevitability of life. Second, the posthuman view
considers consciousness...as an epiphenomenon... Third, the posthuman view
thinks of the body as the original prosthesis we all learn to manipulate... Fourth,
and most important, by these and other means, the posthuman view configures
15

In Hayles' text, she uses "download" rather than "upload," however I believe the latter to be more correct
given her subsequent discussion of disembodied consciousnesses in a communal cyberspace.

16
human being so that it can be seamlessly articulated with intelligent machines.
(3)
Hayles elucidates the shift from the era of the liberal humanist subject to the posthuman
through the above and C.B. Macpherson's conception of possessive individualism.
Macpherson believes "Its [posessive individualism’s] possessive quality is found in its
conception of the individual as essentially the proprietor of his own person or capacities, owing
nothing to society for them. ... The human essence is freedom from the wills of others, and
freedom is a function of possession" (qtd. in Hayles 3). By owning one’s will, one owns oneself
and is thereby responsible only for one’s own actions and one’s own existence as an individual
of rational agency. The individuation of the subject here lies in the representation one's own
will, as it is understood as being separate from the wills of others. For Hayles, then, Hassan's
proclamation that "We need first to understand that the human form - including human desire
and all its external representations - may be changing radically, and thus must be re-visioned"
(qtd. in Hayles 1) is indicative of an understanding of the posthuman in Humanist terms
(human desire and all its external representations) as well as the misstep she sees following
Hassan's call for the revisioning of the human. It is not the possessive individualism of
Macpherson that Hayles is advocating, but rather that one not lose sight of the union of the
individual's body and mind that substantiate the human's existence. The existence that is
particular to humans, Dasein in Heidegger's terminology, is a necessarily and inextricably tied
to being-in-the-world. To "privilege informational pattern over material instantiation" is to
promote the Cartesian split between the mind and the body further, but instead of being only
ever an isolated mind as Descartes was, there is the new option of a continued mental
existence in cyberspace.

17
Hayles devotes a great deal of her book to an analysis of the Macy Conferences on
Cybernetics from 1946 to 1953 as well as to the influence they had on literature and film in the
decades thereafter. Her focus on the conferences brings the hard sciences in direct contact
with the science fiction narratives that drew on the work of Norbert Wiener and other scientists
at the conferences. Hayles understands the ultimate inability of the cyberneticists to develop a
viable artificial intelligence as proof that the possibility of a conscious existence separate, or
separable, from its particular variety of material instantiation was a flawed premise to begin
with. Posthumanism, as Hayles’ line of argumentation goes, is the result of this faulty premise
having been appropriated by science fiction literature and then cultural theorists, all of whom
have “systematically downplayed or erased [embodiment] in the cybernetic construction of the
posthuman” (4) and have been “seduced by fantasies of unlimited power and disembodied
immortality” (5).
This technologically-altered subjectivity that is not beholden to any particular physical
incarnation is the angle taken by Scott Bukatman’s 1993 monograph Terminal Identity.
Bukatman outlines the shift from the mid-twentieth century technologies of the Space Age that
changed the world through their physical capabilities, namely enormous rockets that made
space travel possible, to a focus on electronic technologies of the Information Age that
transport the user’s mind into new kinds of virtual reality. As the Space Age gives way to the
Information Age, humanity is forced to confront “a set of crucial ontological questions regarding
the status and power of the human” (Bukatman 2). This new and unstable ontology consists in
the emergence of terminal existence, which functions as an electronic landscape wherein
humans can rewrite subjective experience, the physics of interaction, and even reality itself.
Bukatman writes:

18
A new subject has emerged: one constituted by electronic technologies, but also
by the machineries of the text. Terminal Identity is a transitional state produced at
the intersection of technology and narration, and it serves as an important space
of accommodation to the new and bewildering array of existential possibilities
that defines our terminal existence. (22)
Bukatman argues that the technological world has changed fundamentally with the
proliferation of the personal computer. No longer is humanity concentrated on the desire to
harness untold quantities of energy as in the Nuclear Age, nor is humanity following the model
of the Space Age, wherein the focus was the physical traversal of vast distances into the
heavens; the Information Age is about creating a new reality on a digital plane. Because this
shift represents a fundamental change in the way humans interact with and conceive of
technology, the cogito of humanism, which has dominated Western philosophy since
Descartes doubted the existence of everything except his thinking mind, must adapt
accordingly to the new technology. In a more succinct formulation: through the development of
electronic virtual spaces, the ontic conditions of human existence have changed, and therefore
the epistemological conception of the subject must change to match them.
It is not just in the hard sciences that Bukatman finds reason to reevaluate the
traditional subject. He writes “I would argue that it is the purpose of much recent science fiction
to construct a new subject-position to interface with the global realms of data circulation, a
subject that can occupy or intersect the cyberscapes of contemporary existence” (8-9). Just as
Hassan and Haraway before him, and Hayles after him, Bukatman uses both narratives and
contemporary technologies to expand upon his argument and construct his notion of terminal

19
identity.16 Bukatman focuses on a wider corpus of literature than Hassan, Haraway, or Hayles
and while he expands upon ideas put forth in “Prometheus as Performer,” Bukatman’s form of
posthumanism is consciousness-centered, which is diametrically opposed to the beingcentered variant of Hayles. For Hayles, the literature and films that Bukatman draws upon 17
are evidence of humans having lost focus on what makes them humans in the first place,
namely their embodied existence, their being-in-the-world. For Hayles, the technology humans
create does not change the essence of embodiment and therefore does not call for any
alteration to the conception of human existence. Humans, for Hayles, are simply doing what
has always been done: using equipment that is ready-to-hand with such adaptability that the
use of the equipment becomes pre-ontological — a point that is also referenced by the
character Context in Hassan’s essay.18
While Bukatman’s terminal subject meets a strong critique in Hayles, he follows her in
drawing significantly from Donna Harraway’s cyborg theory. At the end of the introduction to
his book, Bukatman writes “Terminal Identity is a form of speech, as an essential cyborg
formation, and a potentially subversive reconception of the subject that situates the human and
the technological as coextensive, codependent, and mutually defining” (22). For Bukatman
electronic technologies and virtual realities are not only created by humans, they, in turn, also
affect the humans who use them. This cybernetic loop of mutually-defining feedback produces,
at the computer terminal, a novel (terminal) identity that constitutes a new, but unresolved,
union of the biological and synthetic.

16

Bukatman borrows the locution “terminal identity” from William S. Burroughs, whom Bukatman quotes on
page xiii “The entire planet is being developed into terminal identity and complete surrender...”
17
Tron, Terminator 2, various works by Philip K. Dick, and others.
18
“Posthumanism seems to you a sudden mutation of the times; in fact, the conjunctions of imagination
and science, myth and technology, have begun by firelight in the caves of Lascaux” (Hassan 835-6).

20
Despite the extreme opposition to the concept of terminal identity expressed by Hayles,
Bukatman, like both Harraway and Hayles, builds upon notions of posthumanism put forth in
Hassan’s “Prometheus as Performer.” As previously noted, the mythic figure of Prometheus
represents, like Haraway's figure of the cyborg, a combination of opposites. Rather than a
chimera of the biological and synthetic, Prometheus is a thief and a redeemer, in some stories
creating humans and in others merely endowing humans with fire, knowledge, and art (Hassan
832). In response to this claim made by Mythotext, Text responds "Your image of Prometheus
mirrors our own present. ... Convergences and divergences, conjunctions and disjunctions, are
visible everywhere; on the one hand various myths of totality, on the other, diverse ideologies
of fracture" (832-3). It is exactly these "myths of totality and diverse ideologies of fracture,"
namely works of science fiction, that Bukatman attempts to analyze in Terminal Identity in
order to make his larger cultural argument. He writes:
Science fiction, from at least the 1960s, has expanded the parameters that once
contained the definition of the human. The American science fiction film, for
example, has staged a passage from ontological certainty to uncertainty,
centering upon the relation between Utopia and human definition. ... Yet there is
a utopia to be found in the science fiction film, a utopia that lies in being human,
and if utopia is always defined in relation to an other, a nonutopia, then the
numberless aliens, androids, and evil computers of the SF film are the barbarians
storming the gates of humanity. (16)
Bukatman claims that it is precisely science fiction that has arisen as part of popular
culture "to pose a set of crucial ontological questions regarding the status and power of the
human" (2). These ontological questions find themselves in a mutual cause and effect

21
relationship with the shifts in real world technological pursuits of the Machine-, Nuclear-,
Space-, and Information Ages. Bukatman cites the shift from the Space Age to the Information
Age on the one hand as simply the latest stage in the technological chronology of emergence
that "defines the American relation to manifest destiny and the commitment to an ideology of
progress and modernity" (4) and on the other hand as indicative of a more profound shift in the
ideology of progress and modernity than has thus far occurred. This shift changed technology
from the paradigm of the Saturn V rocket of the Space Age to "newly proliferating technologies
of the Information Age [that] are invisible, circulating outside the human experiences of space
and time" (2).
Throughout Hassan's essay, the proto-cyborgian union of opposites is represented with
various examples, two of the most appropriate in comparing Hassan and Bukatman are found
in the third point of the summary Metatext offers the readers "Imagination and Science, Myth
and Technology" (Hassan 838). In the fourth scene of "Prometheus as Performer," indeed in
the sentences following the passage speculating on the end of 500 years of humanism, the
character Text embodies the old paradigm of humanism in Leonardo da Vinci's figure of the
Vitruvian Man, but claims that now it has "broken through its enclosing circle and square, and
spread across the cosmos" (843). Hassan's article appears after the end of NASA's Apollo
program, in the final years of the Skylab space station, and a few years after the Space Shuttle
began flying. Hassan, citing NASA's manned programs as well as Pioneer 10, refers to "this
expansion of human consciousness into the cosmos, this implication of the mind into the
farthest matter" (843). In the context of Bukatman's discussions of cyberpunk and virtual
realities of the Information Age, one must remain cognizant that Hassan's article predates
William Gibson's seminal work of cyberpunk fiction Neuromancer by eight years, which is the

22
same year that Jaron Lanier founded VPL Research, makers of the DataGlove and EyePhone
which have since become iconic symbols of virtual reality technology. 19 Bukatman would likely
argue that Hassan's claim is not necessarily false, but rather is rooted in Space Age
technologies and is more effective as a prescient anticipation of the real extension of
consciousness that is to come in the Information Age.20
The apparent differences between Bukatman and Hassan on this point are simply the
result of the seventeen year gap between the appearance of Hassan's essay in 1976 and
Bukatman's book in 1993. Hassan's prescience in his description of humanity's desire to
expand its conscious experience beyond the physical confines of the Earth is limited only by
the technology of the period in which he was writing. Hassan's prediction borrows from
Marshall McLuhan, which also anticipates Bukatman's claims in Termainal Identity. In The
Gutenberg Galaxy, McLuhan writes:
An age of rapid transition is one which exists on the frontier between two cultures
and between conflicting technologies. Every moment of its consciousness is an
act of translation of each of these cultures into the other. Today we live on the
frontier between five centuries of mechanism and the new electronics, between
the homogeneous and the simultaneous. (141)
The need for a revisioning of humans that Hassan sees in the work of Claude Lévi-Strauss and
Michel Foucault parallels the end of the Cartesian subject that he sees in the structuralists, and

19

VPL Research went bankrupt in 1990, after which their patents were acquired by SUN Microsystems.
Further information can be found here: http://www.vrs.org.uk/virtual-reality-profiles/vpl-research.html

20

While virtual reality (VR) is most closely associated with the expansion of the home computer in the
1980s and 1990s, especially for Bukatman, it's historical roots stretch into the 1950s and 1960s with the invention
of the Sensorama by Morton Heilig. http://www.vrs.org.uk/virtual-reality/beginning.html

23
it is from the combined influence of these thinkers, as well as McLuhan and Pièrre Teilhard de
Chardin that Hassan, through the character Text, is able to make his claim about the end of
humanism and the necessary revisioning of the human. Bukatman’s argument for the need to
reimagine the human follows in a similar vein to Hassan’s. Bukatman's claim is that with the
shift in the focus of technological advancement from the physically impressive creations of the
Space Age to the immaterial inventions of the Information Age, the world outside of subjective
human consciousness has changed so drastically that humanity's only option to keep pace
with its own creations is to reevaluate our understanding of subjective human consciousness
itself.

Dasein and Phenomenology: A Modernist Take on the Debate
For contemporary posthumanism, Hassan’s “Prometheus as Performer” can be seen as
an attempt to rectify the splitting of the mind and body as well as other errors still present in
culture from humanism and to acknowledge the changing Zeitgeist of the mid twentieth
century. While the mind and body are united in the figure of Prometheus for Hassan, for
Bukatman and Hayles they are not. Even Donna Haraway’s cyborg theory, which also
advocates the union of things previously considered to be opposites, takes a firm materialist
stance and thereby Haraway finds herself on the side of embodied being with Hayles. While
Hassan’s attempt at a posthumanist unification of the mind and body did not produce the
desired changes in the cultural consciousness, one can see in the work of later theorists,
whether they cite Hassan directly or not, that his text has been extremely influential for both

24
the consciousness and embodied being camps of posthumanism in the construction of their
arguments.
While later theorists did not follow Hassan’s lead, they did make attempts to restructure
the long-standing consciousness-embodied being debate within the world of contemporary
high technology. Despite this recontextualization, the essence of the debate remains the same
in posthumanism as it was in modernism, and German idealism before that. Hayles’ beingcentric position in posthumanism and Hassan’s reference to Heidegger’s later work in the fifth
act of “Prometheus as Performer,” point to the modernist influence upon posthumanism,
specifically through the work of Martin Heidegger and his former professor Edmund Husserl.
Hassan quotes a posthumously published interview with Heidegger in Der Spiegel, in
which the philosopher claims that "technology no longer corresponds to the human measure or
way" (848). While Heidegger’s career was focused on understanding the nature of Being, the
work quoted above, as well as the rest of the work after his “Kehre,” addresses the issues
surrounding modern humanity in a technological world, which diverged slightly from his earlier
exploration of the nature of human Being as Dasein in Sein und Zeit. While both Heidegger's
characterization of Dasein and the Cartesian subject as it appears in traditional humanism
attempt to understand and explain the human experience in the world, Heidegger asserts that
Dasein is fundamentally different than the prevailing construction of the liberal humanist
subject; indeed one of Heidegger's expressed goals in Sein und Zeit is the systematic
dismantling of what he views to be an antiquated holdover from humanism that alienates
humans from the true nature of their Being (Sein 22).

25
To set the tone for his exposition on the nature of being, Heidegger begins Sein und
Zeit with a quote from Plato’s Sophist: “Denn offenbar seid ihr doch schon lange mit dem
vertraut, was ihr eigentlich meint, wenn ihr den Ausdruck ,seiend’ gebraucht, wir jedoch
glaubten es einst zwar zu verstehen, jetzt aber sind wir in Verlegenheit gekommen” (1).
Heidegger sees his task, then, as the raising anew “die Frage nach dem Sinn von Sein,” which
he will attempt through a hermeneutic analysis of language and with the “Interpretation der Zeit
als des möglichen Horizontes eines jeden Seinsverständnisses überhaupt…” (1). This task,
according to Heidegger, is necessary because it will overturn a dogmatic prejudice within
philosophy against questions of Being. “Man sagt: ,Sein’ ist der allgemeinste und leerste
Begriff. Als solcher widersteht er jedem Definitionsversuch. … Jeder gebraucht ihn ständig und
versteht auch schon, was er je damit meint” (2). Through centering on the question of Being,
Heidegger places himself in opposition to Husserl’s epistemology and forms the modernist link
between Hayles’ arguments in posthumanism and Hölderlin’s in romanticism.
Heidegger’s methodology is extremely intricate,21 which is a result of the difficulty of the
task at hand: an existing entity asking questions about the nature of its own existence. This
concern about its own being sets human existence apart from that of other kinds of things.
“Das Dasein ist ein Seiendes, das nicht nur unter anderem Seienden vorkommt. Es ist
vielmehr dadurch ontisch ausgezeichnet, dass es diesem Seienden in seinem Sein um dieses
Sein selbst geht. (12). In elucidating the question of Being, then, Heidegger is very careful to
make clear that Being is not an entity in itself, which would result in an ontic discussion of the
factual characteristics of Being as a physical thing, rather than an ontological exposition of the

21

Because Heidegger’s language is so notoriously difficult, I will follow the guidance of Heidegger
translators John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson and use “Being” to refer to the existence of an existing entity
and “being” both for the act and the acting entity.

26
nature of the Being of beings, which is what he intends. Regarding the formal structure of the
question of being, Heidegger writes “Das Sein des Seienden ‘ist’ nicht selbst ein Seiendes. …
Sonach wird auch das Erfragte, der Sinn von Sein, eine eigene Begrifflichkeit verlangen, die
sich wieder wesenhaft abhebt gegen die Begriffe, in denen Seiendes seine bedeutungsmäßige
Bestimmtheit erreicht (6), which he simply follows later with “Sein ist jeweils das Sein eines
Seinden” (9).
In order to undermine the Cartesian subject-object dichotomy, Heidegger outlines an
ontological distinction between humans (Dasein), objects present-at-hand (vorhanden), and
objects ready-to-hand or equipment (zuhanden). The nature of Dasein is that it concerns itself
with understanding its own being. Heidegger writes:
Ausarbeitung der Seinsfrage besagt demnach: Durchsichtigmachen eines
Seienden - des fragenden - in seinem Sein. Das Fragen dieser Frage ist als
Seinsmodus eines Seienden selbst von dem her wesenhaft bestimmt, wonach in
ihm gefragt ist - vom Sein. Dieses Seiende, das wir selbst je sind und das unter
anderem die Seinsmöglichkeit des Fragens hat, fassen wir terminologisch als
Dasein. Die ausdrückliche und durchsichtige Fragestellung nach dem Sinn von
Sein verlangt eine vorgängige angemessene Explikation eines Seienden
(Dasein) hinsichtlich seines Seins. (7)
While the term Dasein refers explicitly and exclusively to the Being of humans, the terms
vorhanden and zuhanden, as well as their substantive forms Vorhandenheit and
Zuhandenheit, describe attitudes Dasein can have toward objects or ways in which Dasein
finds itself in relation to objects in the world. Vorhandenheit is the condition of factual, scientific

27
or phenomenological observation - the object is not used for anything, it is simply an object.
Zuhandenheit, on the other hand, refers to equipment, das Zeug, whereby Dasein sees not the
object itself as a thing, but the function for which the object is used. This, Heidegger says, is
how Dasein encounters most objects in the world.
Der je auf das Zeug zugeschnittene Umgang, darin es sich einzig genuin in
seinem Sein zeigen kann, z.B. das Hämmern mit dem Hammer, erfaßt weder
dieses Seiende thematisch als vorkommendes Ding, noch weiß etwa gar das
Gebrauchen um die Zeugstruktur als solche. (69)
While Vor- and Zuhandenheit are conditions for objects in relation to Dasein, it is the
nature of Dasein itself that is of the greatest importance for Heidegger’s work. Dasein is
fundamentally inseparable from the context in which it exists, namely the world. The world for
Dasein is not mere spaciality or the res extensa in opposition to the res cogitans of
Cartesianism, as that would be a characteristic of Vorhandenheit, rather Dasein’s relationship
to the world, which he terms In-der-Welt-sein, is more fundamental. “Das In-der-Welt-sein ist
zwar eine a priori notwendige Verfassung des Daseins, aber längst nicht ausreichend, um
dessen Sein voll zu bestimmen” (53). Heidegger elucidates his concept of In-der-Welt-sein by
describing Dasein as dwelling in the world. This relationship describes both the familiarity of
Dasein with the nature and structure, the “worldhood,” of the world, which Dasein
demonstrates by seeing functionality and the means to meet an end through equipment, but
also the inseparability of Dasein from the the context in which it exists, as such a separation
would be a violation of the basic understanding of Dasein. (54).

28
Linking Dasein and the world fundamentally and inseparably, Heidegger’s concept of Inder-Welt-sein attempts to demonstrate how the Cartesian dichotomies of subject-object and
res cogitans-res extensa do not address at all the question of Being regarding either the ego
cogito or the extended world. The Cartesian ontology, including the distinctions between
thinking humans and non-thinking objects, is not completely destroyed in Sein und Zeit, rather
Heidegger systematically dismantles Descartes’ arguments and reassembles them within the
ontology he is constructing as issues that are necessary to understand and built on his
foundation of the question of Being.
The inseparability of the thinking mind and the world in which it finds itself and about
which it thinks arises again in 1999 with N. Katherine Hayles’ How We Became Posthuman in
which she recontextualizes Heidegger’s ontology to fit the concerns of the Digital Age. She
writes:
If my nightmare is a culture inhabited by posthumans who regard their bodies as
fashion accessories rather than the grounds of being, my dream is a version of
the posthuman that embraces the possibilities of information technologies without
being seduced by fantasies of unlimited power and disembodied immortality, that
recognizes and celebrates finitude as a condition of human being, and that
understands human life is embedded in a material world of great complexity, one
on which we depend for our continued survival. (5)
As much as Hayles’ contention against the idea of separating bodies and minds mirrors
Heidegger’s In-der-Welt-sein, so too does her objection to computer-based human immortality

29
echo Heidegger’s conception of Dasein as a temporal entity. The temporal structure of Dasein
is wrapped up in the notion of Sorge.
Das primäre Moment der Sorge, das ‘Sichvorweg,’ besagt doch: Dasein existiert
je umwillen seiner selbst. ‘Solange es ist,’ bis zu seinem Ende verhält es sich zu
seinem Sein-können. Auch dann, wenn es, noch existierend, nichts mehr ‘vor
sich’ und ‘seine Rechnung abgeschlossen’ hat, ist sein Sein noch durch das
‘Sichvorweg’ bestimmt. (236)
A fundamental part of this Sichvorweg is the complete acceptance by Dasein of the
certainty of its own future death. By accepting the possibility of its own death, which Heidegger
calls Sein-zum-Tode, Dasein can exercise the Sichvorweg that it is, namely Sorge. Without the
fundamental striving-toward, planning, and becoming that Sorge implies, as well as the Seinzum-Tode that gives Dasein authenticity in its Being, Dasein is stripped of its defining
characteristics. Hayles’ nightmare of a mind uploaded into a computer and granted immortality
through the circuitry indicates the deep existential crisis of humans losing their humanity by
losing their corporeal Being, their In-der-Welt-sein, and also the temporality that defines their
kind of Being in itself. Without the Sichvorweg and Sorge that are necessary to Dasein,
uploaded human minds are not only unable to exist authentically in Heidegger’s
understanding, but present a completely changed ontological structure that is alien to Dasein
as In-der-Welt-sein.
Heidegger’s description of Dasein as being tied a priori to the world, and its constituent
Sorge, mirrors a core part of Hassan’s characterization of the cosmos, performance, and the
symbolism of Prometheus in his understanding of posthumanism. As a summation of the

30
groundwork laid in the first eight pages of Hassan’s “Prometheus,” the character Metatext ends
the second scene with five points about posthumanism. The first reads “the cosmos is
performance, posthumanist culture is a performance in progress, and their symbolic nexus is
Prometheus” (838). Hassan’s “cosmos,” Greek for “world”22 or “order,” refers not to the
physical world in the spatial sense of Heidegger’s Vorhandenheit, rather, given the word’s
original meaning and its modern connotations of the interplanetary vacuum that was being
explored in the late 1970s, “cosmos” may be understood as the contextual dwelling of humans
in the space age, taking into account the planet Earth and space stations, as well as those
alien narrative settings that are ever present in science fiction narratives (843).
Being, both -in-the-world and -toward-death, along with Sorge make up the constituent
parts of Dasein, and as such focus in on the crux of the action that Heidegger is attempting to
analyze. As such, an entity’s existence can only be thought of as an action, and then only as
an action directed toward an end: thus authentic existence for Dasein includes the knowledge
of its own Being as an action, and the directedness through the action of reaching a future
state through Sorge. For Hassan, “the cosmos is performance, posthumanist culture is a
performance in progress, and their symbolic nexus is Prometheus” (838). The actively directed
(i.e. performed) existence of Dasein and the performance of Prometheus demonstrate direct
connections for both thinkers in the relationship of the acting agent to the contextual setting in
which the acting takes place.

22

His use of “cosmos” rather than “world” may be an attempt to distance himself from being too closely
associated with Heidegger, since aligning himself with Heidegger, or any particular theorist involved in the
consciousness-embodied being dichotomy, would undermine his argument about posthumanism as a unification
of opposites. It could also refer to the age of space exploration and science fiction writing that Hassan found
himself in. Given Heidegger’s method of linguistic archaeology, however, it seems somewhat surprising that he
himself did not choose “Kosmos” over “Welt” in Sein und Zeit.

31
Heidegger’s aesthetics in Der Ursprung des Kunstwerks serve to connect the directed
action of Dasein and Hassan’s performative Prometheus further by allowing Hassan’s notion of
posthumanism to be understood in terms of the macroparadigmatic work of art. Hassan
intends that the performance put on by Prometheus should reconfigure the historical ontology
of Hassan’s own cultural moment, as his title states, toward a posthumanist future. Sharing this
function of reconfiguration is Heidegger’s macroparadgmatic conception of a work of art, on
the scale of a Greek temple, tragedy, or god, terms he uses through this section
interchangeably. His reference to Greek mythology and tragedy underscores the connection to
Prometheus, however it is through the effects of Heidegger’s work of art and Hassan’s
performer that the two truly overlap. He writes:
Werksein heißt: eine Welt aufstellen. … Welt ist nie ein Gegenstand, der vor uns
steht und angeschaut werden kann. Welt ist das immer Ungegenständliche, dem
wir unterstehen, solange die Bahnen von Geburt und Tod, Segen und Fluch uns in
das Sein entrückt halten. Wo die wesenhaften Entscheidungen unserer Geschichte
fallen, von uns übernommen und verlassen, verkannt und wieder erfragt werden,
da weltet die Welt. (Kunstwerk 30-31)
As the symbol of posthumanism and the performance in progress that constitutes it,
Prometheus is the harbinger of a new world set up to mark the end of humanism’s fivehundred-year reign.
While Heidegger’s ontology seeks to undermine the Cartesian dualisms of mind-body
and subject-object that have been ever present in both culture at large and the philosophical
tradition since the Enlightenment, the second part of Sein und Zeit, where this is supposed to

32
occur, was never published. Heidegger’s accomplishment, rather, is the construction of an
alternative ontology, whereby subject and object, mind and body, are unified on a primordial
level — the same task that has Prometheus as its symbol. The second and third summations
from Metatext in “Prometheus as Performer” stand out in this respect.
2. Prometheus is himself the figure of a flawed consciousness struggling to
transcend such divisions as the One and the Many, Cosmos and Culture, the
Universal and the Concrete;
3. with regard to posthumanism itself, the most relevant aspect of the
Promethean dialectic concerns Imagination and Science, Myth and Technology,
Earth and Sky, two realms tending to one; (838).

Heidegger’s fundamental ontology of Dasein is both built out of and a reaction against
the epistemological phenomenology of his professor Edmund Husserl. Often cited as the
founder of phenomenology, Husserl’s philosophy consists of an experience-based
epistemology that attempts to solve many of the problems with Descartes’ subjectivist thinking.
Husserl’s phenomenology has been incredibly influential on twentieth century thought, as
evidenced by the complex relationship that subsequent phenomenologists, as well as thinkers
outside of Husserl’s methodology, have had with his work.
That the inﬂuence has been immense can hardly be disputed. This is not to say, of
course, that everybody agreed with him, but the fact that subsequent
phenomenologists, including Heidegger, Ingarden, Schütz, Fink, Sartre, MerleauPonty, Lévinas, Gadamer, Ricoeur, Derrida, Henry and Marion, as well as leading

33
ﬁgures in a whole range of later theory formations, including hermeneutics, critical
theory, deconstruction and post-structuralism, felt a need to react and respond to
Husserl’s project and program testiﬁes to his importance. (Zahavi 71)
While Husserl’s epistemology is grounded in subjective experience, his work does not
suffer from the same dogmatic subject-object dichotomies, the problem of other minds, and
uncertainty of the external world that plagued Descartes. As a self-described transcendental
idealist, Husserl was also able to overcome the problematic noumena that was central to
Kant’s original transcendental idealism. Even with these accomplishments, however, the
reception of Husserl’s philosophy after his death in 1938 was subject to stark critiques of his
idealism, a tradition which has fallen out of vogue with the philosophical community in the
recent past.
With the rallying cry of “To the things themselves!,” Husserl’s phenomenology centers
on the subjective experience of phenomena as they are experienceable; that is to say, without
the inclusion of an unrevealed side of the phenomenon that remains in-itself.23 Consciousness,
for Husserl, is always inherently consciousness of something. This state of being intentionally
directed toward a phenomenon he calls an act of consciousness, which forms the basis of the
phenomenological experience. He writes “Die Intentionalität ist es, die Bewußtsein im
prägnanten Sinne charakterisiert, und die es rechtfertigt, zugleich den ganzen Erlebnisstrom
als Bewußtseinsstrom und als Einheit eines Bewußtseins zu bezeichnen.” (Ideen I, 168).
23

“Unrevealed” here refers to Kant’s Ding an sich, which is the part of every phenomenon that is not
accessible to human perception. A major point in Husserl’s phenomenology is that he contrasts Kant on this point
stating that phenomena are inherently perceivable in their true forms, rather than as mere appearances as Kant
claims. This distinction plays a large role in Bukatman’s claim in Terminal Identity that humans must adapt to
render the new phenomena of virtual spaces present to consciousness. Computer monitors, for example, display
virtual spaces in ways that are already perceivable by consciousness rather than as they truly are, that is to say
they are appearances in the Kantian sense. By augmenting our abilities to perceive phenomena, as Bukatman
argues, we may then be able to render digital, virtual spaces directly present to consciousness.

34
The question of whether the reality of phenomena can be known as they are taken from
a subjective perspective, a problem for both Descartes and Kant, does not arise for Husserl
because of this intentional character of consciousness. Perceivable phenomena are not limited
to empirically observable objects, they are existence-independent; however, they are
necessarily limited by the ways they are thought of, that is to say they are conceptiondependent. For Husserl’s phenomenological subject, phenomena that empirically exist in the
external world are just as subjectively perceivable, that is to say just as present to
consciousness, as feelings and imaginary objects. One can easily think of any number of
deities and mythical beings, which renders them perceivable to subjective consciousness, but
not existent.
Conception-dependence, on the other hand, refers to how a subject understands a
particular phenomenon. For example, René Magritte’s surrealist painting La trahison des
images24 draws a line between an object, in this case a pipe, and the image of the object that
constitutes the painting itself. While the viewer’s initial understanding would be that it is a pipe,
Magritte’s inscription “Ceci n’est pas une pipe”25 forces the viewer to reanalyze the contents of
the painting and admit that it is not an actual pipe standing before the viewer, rather simply an
image of one. The conception of Magritte’s work changes for the phenomenological subject
from being “a pipe” to “an image of a pipe,” which, in turn, changes how the subject relates to
the object.
The perceptual perspective held by the phenomenological subject dictates how
phenomena are perceived and what assumptions are made about them. If the image of the
24
25

English title: The Treachery of Images
“This is not a pipe.”

35
pipe in Magritte’s painting is taken by the perceiving subject to be a real pipe, the subject will
not assume that the totality of the phenomenon is only what can be seen from the subject’s
current perspective, rather the pipe is understood as a three-dimensional object with other
perceivable external sides, an internal chamber for tobacco and hole connecting the stem to
the bottom of the chamber. These external and interior features which are not visible from the
perspective offered in the painting are, in Husserl’s terms, beyond the internal horizon and are
co-given with the perceived face.
In the intended understanding of Magritte’s image of a pipe, then, the subject is aware
that it is only an image painted onto canvas, offering another set of co-given features, the
texture of the paint viewed up-close, the reverse of the image viewed from the back of the
canvas, etc, beyond the internal horizon of the image. The external horizon of the pipe
separates the image of the pipe as the object of perception from those elements that are not
directly part of the pipe image itself but are also co-given, namely the background and the text.
The existences of phenomena are in this way transcendent of the subject’s perception of them,
which is how Husserl’s phenomenology is a transcendental philosophy. (Ideen I 298-300)
While phenomenology focuses on the perception of objects by a consciousness,
Husserl avoids the problematic Cartesian duality of res cogitans and res extensa. Husserl’s
notion of the body allows for a distinction between Körper, physical body, and Leib, the living
body. Husserl writes:
So sind rein wahrnehmungsmäßig Körper und Leib unterschieden; Leib, nämlich
als der einzig wirklich wahrnehmungsmäßige Leib, mein Leib. Wie das
Bewußtsein zustande kommt, in den gleichwohl mein Leib die Seinsgeltung

36
eines Körpers gewinnt, wie anderseits gewisse Körper meines
Wahrnehmungsfeldes dazu kommen, als Leiber, Leiber “fremder” Ich-Subjekte
zu gelten, das sind nun notwendige Fragen. (Krisis 109).
An individual for Husserl is more than just a thinking mind as Descartes had reasoned,
rather the phenomenological subject exists simultaneously as a Körper on the field of objects
and as a Leib, a consciousness embedded within the perceptual vessel of the body, through
which the consciousness is able to perceive the world.
Aber die leibliche Ichlichkeit ist selbstverständlich nicht die einzige, und jede ihrer
Weisen ist von jeder anderen nicht abzutrennen; sie bilden bei allem Wandel eine
Einheit. So sind wir konkret leiblich, aber nicht nur leiblich, als volle Ich-Subjekte,
je als das volle Ich-der-Mensch im Wahrnehmungsfeld u.s.w., und, wie weit
immer gefaßt, im Bewußtseinsfeld. (Krisis 109-110)
Husserl continues “In meinem Wahrnehmungsfeld finde ich mich, ichlich waltend in meinen
Organen, und so überhaupt in allem, <was> sonst mir ichlich in meinen Ich-Akten und
Vermögen zugehört (110). The Leib for Husserl represents a complex and interdependent
relationship between the consciousness that perceives phenomena and the sensory organs
that function as the means of input for external phenomena.
The complexity of the relationship Husserl postulates between ego, Leib, and Körper
distances itself severely from the Cartesian res cogitans-res extensa model. Similarly, Husserl
describes the relationship between the subject and the world with much greater nuance than
his predecessors.

37
Wir sind in ihr [der Welt] Objekte unter Objekten, lebensweltlich gesprochen;
nämlich als da und dort seinde, in schlichter Erfahrungsgewißheit, vor allen
wissenschaftlichen, sei es physiologischen, psychologischen, soziologischen usw.
Feststellungen. Wir sind andererseits Subjekte für diese Welt, nämlich als die sie
erfahrenden, bedenkenden, bewertenden, zwecktätig auf sie bezogenen
Ichsubjekte, für welche diese Umwelt nur den Seinssinn hat, den ihr unsere
Erfahrungen, unsere Gedanken, unsere Wertungen usw. jeweilig gegeben haben,
und in den Geltungsmodis (der Seinsgewißheit, der Möglichkeit, ev. des Scheins
usw.), die habituelle Erwerbe von früher her besitzen und in uns tragen, als
beliebig wieder aktualisierbare Geltungen des und des Inhalts. (Krisis 107)
The Lebenswelt for Husserl is, simply put, the world of phenomena as experienced by the ego;
it is the totality of experienceable phenomena, including both external objects and subjective
perceptions.
One of the strengths of Husserl’s phenomenology is the fluid adaptability it gains
through concerning itself with subjective perceptions and the relationship between
consciousness and the observed phenomenon. As the structure of the world has changed
through the exponential growth of technology through the twentieth century, the structure of
intentionality including the ego, Leib, and Lebenswelt have adapted seamlessly to the speed of
modern transportation, advances in science, as well as flight and space travel. However, it is
with the advancements of computers and the advent of virtual spaces that Husserl’s
phenomenological ego experiences difficulties in perceiving the new digital spaces of the
Information Age. Because these virtual spaces are only perceivable by means of computer
monitors or virtual reality kits and not directly, they function as mere appearances, which refer

38
to another, unattainable thing in itself. As Husserl’s phenomenology rejects the Kantian
noumena, he would argue that the Leib must, then, adapt to have the ability to perceive these
new phenomena, which is exactly where Bukatman picks up Husserl’s line of reasoning.
It is the advent of the Information Age that Scott Bukatman marks as a point of
departure regarding how subjects are able to perceive the world. Before the 1980s, the
technology of the Space and Nuclear Ages altered human perception of the world, however,
these new perceptions did not mark radical changes as they still involve the familiar physical
world that human existence has always occupied. With the digital revolution of the Information
Age, humans have developed technologies that have enabled them to invent a fundamentally
new realm of digital and virtual spaces.
While the Nuclear and Space Ages provided the phenomenological subject with new
perspectives and settings in which to experience phenomena, the scientific methods, tools,
and understandings required for apprehension of atomic and extra-atmospheric phenomena
did not differ so radically from those that came before. Quantum physics is admittedly a large
departure from the older Newtonian mechanics, however the importance of the shift here is
that quantum physics revealed an already existing realm that was simply unable to be
experienced without the newer advancements in physics. Advancements in computer
technology, however, literally allow humans to create virtual worlds in which everything from
the effects of gravity, spatial orientation, and time are intentionally programmed into a space
that exists and is experienceable only within a computer.
In response to these new virtual spaces as they manifest themselves in the technology
of the real world as well as in works of science fiction, Bukatman calls for the reevaluation and

39
eventual recreation of the phenomenological subject. Through the recreation of themselves as
terminal subjects, in his thinking, humans will overcome the division between themselves and
the virtual worlds of their creation by augmenting themselves to allow the digital environments
of cyberspace to become present to consciousness. In Husserlian terms, Bukatman is
advocating the alteration of the Leib such that it would be capable perception beyond the
sensory abilities that help the ego apprehend and understand the ego’s body in the physical
world. A terminal subject for Bukatman would not differ greatly from the various human
enhancements already present in science fiction literature, primarily in the subgenre of
cyberpunk.26 By augmenting the brain to process information at the speed of a computer, to
perceive lines of computer code as physically rendered space, and thereby to make sense of a
virtual environment, Husserl’s notion of the Lebenswelt expands to include the virtual worlds
and digital spaces that humans have created for themselves.
Hassan’s dynamic re-visioning of da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man bursting out of the confining
circle and square help to define his conception of posthumanism, but when viewed through the
lens of Bukatman’s phenomenology, also acts as a metaphor for humans in the age of
cyberpunk fiction and virtual worlds. Predating Hassan’s “Prometheus” by roughly 500 years,
da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man was an illustration of the proper proportions of the human body as
described by the architect Vitruvius. After cataloguing the sizes of different body parts in
relation to one another, Vitruvius based his architecture on these measurements. While
humans were seen as being made in the divine image, the human form became the measure
of the physical world, and reciprocally reinforced both the Euclidian geometry used to
demonstrate its perfection and the proportions themselves as grounding points for human
26

Titles with characters that exemplify these enhancements include Neuromancer, TRON, The Matrix,
Deus Ex and others.

40
creation (Steadman 16). Half a millenium later, however, Hassan portrays the Vitruvian Man
breaking from his Euclidean confines just as the Space Age gives way to the Information Age.
As he is no longer restricted to the geometry of the physical world, Hassan’s new Vitruvian
Man anticipates the new abilities granted to characters of cyberpunk narratives through
internal integration with technology, such as the canonical character of Case in William
Gibson’s Neuromancer. Additionally, Hassan’s new image of the human builds upon narratives
that predate the major cyberpunk works of the 1980’s including Alfred Bester’s The Stars My
Destination (1956) and John Brunner’s The Shockwave Rider (1975).

I am I, or Maybe I’m Just Distanced from My Absolute Being:
Idealism and Romanticism

By describing a change in the external world that demands an equal change within the
phenomenological subject, Bukatman’s thesis of Terminal Identity harkens back to the third
fundamental principle of philosophy in Johann Gottlieb Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre. Indeed,
this connection between Bukatman and Fichte runs much deeper and is enriched by the
incorporation of Husserl’s phenomenology as an intermediate step between the two.
A self-described Kantian, Fichte works in a similar vein of transcendental idealism to
Kant in his attempt to overcome many of the problematic elements of Enlightenment
philosophy. Fichte differs, however, in that he does away with the equally problematic
noumenon, rendering objects directly knowable by the subject, and additionally he grounds all

41
of reality in the subject’s own consciousness through the creation of his Three Fundamental
Principles.
Through his attempts to further develop and fundamentally alter the transcendental
idealism begun by Kant, Fichte found himself continuing Kant’s attempt to overcome a crisis
within Enlightenment philosophy and re-ground it within its own primary directive: the authority
of reason (Beiser 22). The rising problems within the Enlightenment centered on the extension
of its core tenets of rational criticism and scientific naturalism (Beiser 18). Just as Descartes’
epistemological inquiry led him from the question of what it was possible for him to know
indubitably to the proclamation that everything beyond his own thinking mind is uncertain and
therefore possibly an illusion, the criticism inherent in the Enlightenment extended itself into
skepticism. As Beiser writes, “skepticism undermines out common-sense beliefs in the reality
of the external world, other minds, and even our own selves” (18).
The extension of naturalism is equally dangerous to the Enlightenment’s own goals
because it devolves into materialism, which “threatens the beliefs in freedom, immortality, and
the sui generis status of the mind” (Beiser 18). By attempting to render everything that exists
as explicable, scientific naturalism attempts to describe objects through mechanical and
mathematical laws, thereby rendering everything that exists as material. Here, Cartesian
philosophy provides another example. Because cognition was unable to be measured by the
mechanical-mathematical model, a dualism between mind and matter was necessary to
preserve the utility of the scientific approach, which thereby left a sharp division between the
understandable and measurable world of physical entities and the mysterious world of
cognition. (Beiser 20-21).

42
Kant describes his solution to these problems as his Copernican Revolution. With this,
Kant attempts to change the prevailing conception of truth, wherein rather than truth lying in
conceptions conforming to objects, Kant proposes that truth be seen as objects conforming to
concepts. In other words, truth becomes “the agreement of our perceptions with certain
universal and necessary concepts that determine the form or structure of experience” (Beiser
23). Kant’s Copernican Revolution renders truth as a function of the conformity of
representations to universal forms held by consciousness. (Kant, Vernunft 11-12)
Through this new conception of truth, Kant developed his Ding an sich, which states
that human perception is not of objects themselves as they are inherently unknowable, rather
perception is of appearances. (Kant, Vernunft 17) Despite Kant’s best efforts, skepticism from
neo-Humean thinkers such as Solomon Maimon, Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, and others arise in
the late 1780s and early 1790s. Additionally, Maimon argued that Kant’s epistemological
distinction between the faculties of understanding and intuition was simply a newer formulation
of the dualisms that plagued Cartesian philosophy. (Beiser 28)
Like Kant, Fichte attempted to create a philosophy which upheld the critical reason of
the Enlightenment, but simultaneously guarded against skepticism and materialism. In 1794,
after reading both Kant’s Kritik der reinen Vernunft and the materialist and skepticist attacks
that followed, Fichte developed and published Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre,27
in which he endeavored to overcome the nagging problems of Enlightenment philosophy as
well as the dualisms in Kant’s work that allowed them to persist. To this end, Fichte’s idealism
27

While the term Wissenschaftslehre is sometimes used to denote individual works published by Fichte, it
is important to remember that per Fichte’s usage, Wissenschaftslehre refers to his philosophical system as a
whole and not to one particular book as several works in his oeuvre contain the term in their titles. My account of
Fichte’s system will focus mainly on this work from his time in Jena because it was, and remains, the most
influential account of his thought.

43
centers on an absolute I, which is constituted by both the cognizing subject and its antithesis,
the not-I, or more simply put the external world of objects, and their striving-limiting
interrelationship.
Fichte lays out his purpose in the first sentences of the Grundlage by stating “Wir haben
den absolutersten, schlechthin unbedingten Grundsatz, alles menschlichen Wissen
aufzusuchen. Beweisen, oder bestimmen lässt er sich nicht, wenn er absoluterster Grundsatz
sein soll” (3). By being neither proven nor determined, this first fundamental principle that
Fichte seeks must not rely on anything beyond itself for its own necessary validity. To this end,
Fichte employs the Law of Identity, rendered as A = A. Fichte is clear, however, that through
this he is not simply stating that “A is” or “there is an A,” rather he insists that “wenn A sey, so
sey A. Mithin ist davon ob überhaupt A sey, oder nicht, gar nicht die Frage” (6).
Fichte’s proposition, as he says, does not impart any information about the A itself,
rather it describes a relationship between the two A’s, which he calls X. Of this he writes:
X wenigstens ist im Ich, und durch das Ich gesetzt denn das Ich ist es, welches im
obigen Satze [A = A] urtheilt, und zwar nach X, als einem Gesetze urtheilt; welches
mithin dem Ich gegeben und da es schlechthin und ohne allen weiteren Grund
aufgestellt wird, dem Ich durch das Ich selbst gegeben seyn muss” (6-7).
Fichte concludes from this logical exploration that the logical proposition “A = A” is
interchangeable with “Ich = Ich” or “Ich bin Ich,” which he then ultimately renders as “Das Ich
sezt sich selbst, und es ist, vermöge dieses blossen Setzens durch sich selbst; und
umgekehrt: Das Ich ist, und es sezt sein Seyn, vermöge seines blossen Seyns” (10). Because
the logical proposition that forms the basis of “The I posits itself” is true through itself, Fichte

44
counts this as absolute, first, and unconditioned first principle of philosophy that he has been
searching for. Through this first principle, Fichte asserts that the thinking subject affirms its
own self as existing.
With the existence of the subject grounded in the logical Law of Identity, Fichte moved
on to creating his second principle writing:
Aus dem gleichen Grunde, aus welchem der erste Grundsaz nicht beweisen, noch
abgeleitet werden konnte, kann es auch der zweite nicht. Wir gehen daher auch
hier, gerade wie oben, von einer Thatsache des empirischen Bewusstseyns aus,
und verfahren mit derselben aus der gleichen Befugniss auf die gleiche Art. (17)
In seeking a second principle that expands the first, while at the same time being just as
indubitable and necessarily true within itself, Fichte proposes the negative form of his initial
principle, -A ≠ A, or the principle of opposition. Just as in his first principle, A = A, Fichte’s
second takes the subject as its starting point and posits that that what is not the subject, that is
to say other objects in the world, is not the same as the subject.28
The effect of such a clearly obvious statement is that Fichte has grounded a world of
objects external to the subject within the consciousness of the subject itself. Just as with the
first principle, this postulation refers to the relationship between -A and A rather than the
content of either. Fichte writes:
Die Form von -A wird bestimmt durch die Handlung schlechthin; es ist ein
Gegentheil, weil es Produkt eines Gegensetzens ist: die Materie durch A; es ist
28

At this point, it should be noted that Fichte did not write the Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre
for a popular audience, rather this text was distributed as supplementary material for his lectures.

45
nicht, was A ist; und sein ganzes Wesen besteht darin, dass es nicht ist, was A ist.
— Ich weiss von -A, dass es von irgend einem A das Gegentheil sey. Was aber
dasjenige sey, oder nicht sey, von welchem ich jenes weiss, kann ich nur unter der
Bedingung wissen, dass ich A kenne. (21)
Through positing the not-I, the second principle presupposes the existence of an I. From here,
Fichte makes the same abstractions from his logical notation to the roles of the I and its
opposite, the not-I. While these two principles ground the existence of subjectivity and
objectivity within logical laws, they do not provide a comprehensive account of existence. Both
principles, as Fichte says, describe relationships to subjectivity, it is only in his third and final
principle that the relationship between the two previous principles is elucidated.
Because both the I and not-I are posited through consciousness, the resolution of the
two opposites must also be grounded therein. Of this third principle, Fichte writes “Es sollen
durch sie das entgegengesezte Ich, und Nicht-Ich vereinigt, gleich gesezt werden, ohne dass
sie sich gegenseitig aufheben. Obige Gegensätze sollen in die Identität des einigen
Bewusstseyns aufgenommen werden” (26). The relationship between the I and not-I is based
on their mutual limitation. By limitation, Fichte means that while both are grounded in the
consciousness of the subject, neither the I nor the not-I is absolute in its existence. He writes
“Das Ich ist im Ich nicht gesezt insofern, d.i. nach denjenigem Theilen der Realität, mit welchen
das Nicht-Ich gesezt ist. Ein Theil der Realität, d.i. derjenige der dem Nicht-Ich beigelegt wird,
ist im Ich aufgehoben” (29). Through this principle the boundaries between the I and the not-I
are determined, and thereby their mutual existence and interdependence are constitutive of
the absolute consciousness that comprises Fichte’s philosophical system.

46
By grounding his Wissenschaftslehre in these three principles, Fichte constructs a
system in which the subject can posit itself and direct itself onto itself, or onto any other object,
thereby positing its existence as well. By centering all reality through the position of the
subject, Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre lays the groundwork upon which Husserl will build his
phenomenology just over a century later. Both Fichte and Husserl considered themselves
transcendental idealists,29 however both broke with Kantian thinking in similar ways. It was
only after Fichte structured transcendental idealism without the need for Kantian noumena that
Husserl was able to create his phenomenology around perceptions of the things themselves;
for without this fundamental step in post-Kantian thinking, Husserl’s phenomenology would be
of the appearances of objects, which in Kantian terms is distinct from the objects’ true reality,
rather than of actual and knowable objects themselves.
While both the I and not-I are both posited through subjectivity, Fichte describes both as
striving against the will of the other to become absolute. This striving of the I, or Streben to use
Fichte’s terminology, is a fundamental part of the I’s relationship to the not-I. The striving of the
I, however, does not become absolute because of an equal Gegenstreben by the not-I. Fichte
writes, “Das Gleichgewicht zwischen beiden muss gesezt werden” (283). The I’s relationship to
its opposite, the not-I, and its Gegenstreben will further influence Husserl’s phenomenology in
that the subject for both Fichte and Husserl needs an object, even if the object of
consciousness is the subject’s own consciousness itself.
1.) Im Ich ist ursprünglich ein Streben die Unendlichkeit auszufüllen. Dieses
Streben wiederstreitet allem Objekte.

29

For further information on the Fichte-Husserl connection, see Michael Inwood’s contributions to the
Oxford Companion to Philosophy.

47
2.) Das Ich hat in sich das Gesez, über sich zu reflektiren, als die Unendlichkeit
ausfüllend. Nun aber kann es nicht über sich, und überhaupt über nichts
reflektiren, wenn dasselbe nicht begränzt ist. Die Erfüllung dieses Gesetzes, oder
— was das gleiche heisst — die Befriedigung des Reflexionstriebes ist demnach
bedingt, und hängt ab vom Objekte. Er kann nicht befriedigt werden, ohne Objekte,
— mithin lässt er sich auch beschreiben als ein Trieb nach dem Objekte. (Fichte,
Grundlage 287)
Fichte’s conception of the mutual Streben of the I and not-I not only anticipates
Husserl’s phenomenology; it is also the basis for Bukatman’s main argument in Terminal
Identity. As previously stated, Bukatman claims that the technological advances of the
Information Age represent a fundamental shift away from the Space-, Nuclear-, and Industrial
Ages because computer technology functions both in the physical world, but also creates a
virtual world through its software. This new virtual realm, which Bukatman calls Terminal
Space, is only accessible to its human creators through input (keyboards, mice, controllers,
etc.) and output devices (monitors, etc.), which marks a disconnect between the virtual space
as a virtual environment and the representation of it and interaction with it through the
computer’s input and output mechanisms. Bukatman argues that because this Terminal Space
has exceeded the perceptual abilities of the subjects who interact with it, humans must adapt
to be able to perceive these new virtual environments. To support his claim Bukatman cites a
number of science fiction and cyberpunk works, in which humans are technologically altered
so that Terminal Spaces are rendered present to consciousness. In Bukatman’s
characterization of the technological world, the Streben of the not-I has come out of equilibrium
with, and indeed surpassed, the human subject. According to both Fichte and Bukatman, the I

48
must change within itself to adapt to the new world of objects, the not-I, and as Bukatman’s
Husserlian reasoning goes, to render Terminal Space present to consciousness.
After Fichte was driven out of Jena due to accusations of atheism and in the wake of
strong critiques from Hölderlin and other romantics, he continued to lecture on and develop his
Wissenschaftslehre as well as the rest of his philosophy. In 1806 at the Friedrich-Alexander
Universität in Erlangen, he delivered a series of religious and ethical lectures that would be
published under the title Die Anweisung zum seeligen Leben. It is evident from these lectures
that the controversial beliefs which led to the end of his time in Jena had not abated, and in
fact foreshadow the resurgence of the Prometheus myth in German Romanticism and then
later in the work of Ihab Hassan. In an almost proto-Nietzschean move toward the end of the
seventh lecture, Fichte proclaims:
Du bedarfst keines Dinges ausser dir; auch nicht eines Gottes; du selbst bist dir
dein Gott, dein Heiland und dein Erlöser...Ein ehrwürdiges Bild dieser Denkart ist
die Darstellung, die ein alter Dichter von dem mythischen Prometheus macht,
welcher, im Bewusstseyn seiner gerechten und guten That, des Donnerers über
den Wolken und aller Qualen, die derselbe auf sein Haupt häuft, lachet, und
unerschrockenen Muthes die Trümmer der Welt über sich zusammenstürzen sieht.
(Sämtliche, Band 5 504)
Following this, Fichte quotes the end section of Goethe’s “Prometheus” in which the titan,
defying Zeus, sits and creates humans in his own image.
Goethe’s 1775 Sturm und Drang poem functions as “the indisputable fount of modern
representations of the myth,” although his is by no means the first retelling in the post-

49
Hellenistic era30 (Bertagnolli 17). While many authors in the years leading up to Goethe’s ode
used both the figure and myth of Prometheus to illustrate various messages about humans
and the nature of humanity, the focus shifted with Goethe’s poem to champion the titan’s
rebellion against an unjust deity, a theme which echoed throughout German Romanticism
(Bertagnolli 19).
Hassan’s contemporary use of Prometheus as the symbol for posthumanism finds its
roots not just in the Greek myth, but also with Fichte’s appropriation of this symbolism in Die
Anweisung zum seeligen Leben, which expands his Wissenschaftslehre into the fields of
ethical and religious philosophy. Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre is characterized by the belief that
all reality is based within the thinking self’s own consciousness, which marks a pointed logical
diversion from the earlier Cartesian reasoning that argued for the validity of the ego’s
perceptions on the grounds that God would not be deceptive (Descartes 71). From this
assertion in the Wissenschaftslehre, Fichte’s proclamation that one needs only oneself and is
to oneself a god in Die Anweisung zum seeligen Leben seems only the logical consequent of
following his original line of thinking. As a symbol for Fichte’s philosophy, Prometheus stands
for breaking out of antiquated constraints and beliefs, and asserting the validity of one’s own
consciousness as sufficient to constitute one’s own reality. Fichte’s image of the titan
anticipates Hassan’s in these respects as well as in the united nature of the One and the Many
and limit and unitedness (fundamental parts of Prometheus according to Hassan), two
opposites bound together in a continuous relationship of mutual striving (Fichte’s third
principle).
30

Predecessor’s to Goethe’s ode include Lord Anthony Ashley Shaftesbury’s Soliloquy, or Advice to an
Author (1711), Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s Discours sur les sciences et les artes (1750) Georg Christoph Tobler’s
Der befreyte Prometeus (1782), and others. For a thorough overview of the Prometheus myth leading up to the
Romantic era, see the first chapter of Paul Bertagnolli’s Prometheus in Music.

50
Despite the huge popularity of Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre, not everyone in the German
intellectual community came under the spell of the so-called titan of Jena. Just as in the
subsequent epistemological-ontological debates in Modernism and Posthumanism, the
epistemological argument in German Idealism appeared first and incited a strong rebuttal from
the ontology camp. Less than a year after the publication of Fichte’s Grundlage zur gesamten
Wissenschaftslehre, Friedrich Hölderlin reacted against Fichte and his philosophical principles
with the release of a pamphlet titled “Über Urtheil und Seyn” in 1795.
Hölderlin’s criticism of Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre is pointed and simple: Fichte’s first
principle does not point to Being as such, and therefore Fichte has misunderstood its nature.
Hölderlin writes:
Wo Subjekt und Objekt schlechthin, nicht nur zum Teil vereiniget ist, mithin
so vereiniget, daß gar keine Teilung vorgenommen werden kann, ohne das Wesen
desjenigen, was getrennt werden soll, zu verletzen, da und sonst nirgends kann
von einem Sein schlechthin die Rede sein, wie es bei der intellektualen
Anschauung der Fall ist.
Aber dieses Sein muß nicht mit der Identität verwechselt werden. Wenn ich
sage: Ich bin Ich, so ist das Subjekt (Ich) und das Objekt (Ich) nicht so vereiniget,
daß gar keine Trennung vorgenommen werden kann, ohne, das Wesen
desjenigen, was getrennt werden soll, zu verletzen; im Gegenteil das Ich ist nur
durch diese Trennung des Ichs vom Ich möglich. Wie kann ich sagen: Ich! ohne
Selbstbewußtsein? (226)
Absolute Being, for Hölderlin, is not grounded in the Law of Identity, moreover it is not even
attainable through reason, and attempting to understand it through the terms Subject and

51
Object represents a futile effort. In a play on the German word for judgement, Urteil, Hölderlin
describes the original division, Ur-Teilung, that has separated Subject and Object as distinct
entities. Hölderlin believes that Fichte’s first principle, I am I, represents the paradigmatic
example of this problematic distinction. “ »Ich bin Ich« ist das passendste Beispiel zu diesem
Begriffe der Urteilung, als Theoretischer Urteilung, denn in der praktischen Urteilung setzt es
sich dem Nichtich, nicht sich selbst entgegen” (227).31
Hölderlin’s thinking had far-reaching impact on many thinkers including Martin
Heidegger in particular. Heidegger’s fascination with Hölderlin is well known, including his
lectures on the poet and specifically on “Der Ister” as Hölderlin’s work overall focuses on a
primordial state of Being that is not attainable or knowable through traditional philosophy or
metaphysics. The later Heidegger followed Hölderlin’s position that poetry, and not traditional
philosophy, is the means to understand Being. By focusing on an ontological model of
existence, the ideas of Hölderlin serve to influence, through Heidegger, the position of
Katherine Hayles regarding the nature of consciousness and the body in regard to the, in her
mind, technological impossibilities of disembodied consciousnesses, mind-uploading, and
existence beyond human corporeality.
Both Heidegger and Hayles agree with Hölderlin’s position that the distinction between
subjects and objects cannot occur at the most fundamental level, that is to say that subjective
consciousness cannot be separated from an extended body (in Descartes’ terminology). The
unity between consciousness and body was attempted by Husserl, but all three ontologists
would agree that his concept of Leib still is not on the same level as their conception of Being.
31

Hölderlin was not the only representative of German Romanticism to critique the Wissenschaftslehre.
Novalis and others put forth similar positions, but as my argument presently deals with the advent of the
discussion in each epoch, discussion of subsequent romantic literature by Novalis, Hölderlin, and others will be
saved for later chapters.

52
Being, in the terminology of both Heidegger and Hölderlin, is represented by Hayles as
embodiment. To reinvoke the requisite portion of Hölderlin’s argument:
Wo Subjekt und Objekt schlechthin, nicht nur zum Teil vereiniget ist, mithin so
vereiniget, daß gar keine Teilung vorgenommen werden kann, ohne das Wesen
desjenigen, was getrennt werden soll, zu verletzen, da und sonst nirgends kann
von einem Sein schlechthin die Rede sein, wie es bei der intellektualen
Anschauung der Fall ist. (226)
Hölderlin’s argument of indivisibility between subject and object on the level of Being is readdressed by Heidegger through his concepts of Dasein and In-der-Welt-sein, and then again
by Hayles through embodiment. Hayles argues that the mind and body may not be separated,
as is depicted in the science fiction literature of Philip K. Dick, William Gibson, and others, nor
can it ever be possible that Hans Moravec’s dream about disembodied immortality within a
computer, hive intelligence, and cognitive downloading into various bodies be a possibility. For
all three of these ontologists, the mind is not something different from the body, it is just a word
for something of the body and the existing individual is merely something of the world in which
it lives.
Similar to Fichte’s philosophy on the epistemology side, Hölderlin’s thought also
anticipates elements of Hassan’s image of Prometheus and his conception of posthumanism.
Fundamental to Hassan’s construction of Prometheus is how he stands for the resolution of
opposites that have persisted from older modes of thinking. Just as the divisions between
subject and object for Hölderlin indicate an Ur-Theilung between our current conscious state
and the fundamental state of Being, Hassan believes that dichotomous thinking has created

53
false divisions between the One and the Many, human and machine, etc, and the resolution of
which comes in the movement of posthumanism with Prometheus as its symbol.

Conclusion
Hassan’s “Prometheus as Performer” attempts to unify a schism in philosophical
thought that has existed in its current form since the German idealists tried to fix problematic
elements of Enlightenment humanist philosophy. He gives this new movement, which he
“helplessly” terms posthumanism, the mythical figure of Prometheus as its symbol. He chooses
Prometheus because the titan embodies a unity of opposites, which is exactly what he hopes
posthumanism will achieve - namely it will rectify the dualistic thinking (i.e. subject-object, manmachine, either-or, etc) that have persisted over the last 500 years.
Perhaps predictably, theorists in the years since Hassan’s essay have picked up on the
theme of posthumanism, especially as it pertains to humans interacting with the contemporary
world of high technology. However, the older divisions from the Enlightenment as well as those
from several previous attempts to fix Enlightenment philosophy (German idealism,
romanticism, and modernism) resurface in posthumanism, despite the lack of
acknowledgement that these earlier attempts receive in contemporary posthumanist theory.
Contemporary theorists disagree on how best to philosophically understand the nature of the
contemporary world of high technology and humanity’s place within it.
It is my argument through this chapter that this debate, which I have characterized as
being between epistemological and ontological understandings of human essence and

54
existence, have existed in this fundamental construction since the late 18th century and that
the only real change in the argument that has come with posthumanism is the context, that is
to say the world of computer technologies and virtual environments. Notable, however, for
posthumanism in contrast to the previous epochs is Hassan’s position, which would overcome
once and for all the divisions inherent in the epistemology-ontology debate. This chapter traced
two parallel lines of argument from German idealism to posthumanism, which may be rendered
thus:

55

Chapter 2: Mind over Matter
Hier sitz ich, forme Menschen
Nach meinem Bilde,
Ein Geschlecht, das mir gleich sei,
Zu leiden, zu weinen,
Zu genießen und zu freuen sich,
Und dein nicht zu achten,
Wie ich!
—
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, “Prometheus” 1789

Humanism is always becoming posthumanism.
— Neil Badmington, Alien Chic
Introduction
While the philosophical debate between epistemological and ontological understandings
of human existence has, in its current form, occupied thinkers for the last two centuries, the
dialogue between the two competing models has by no means been relegated to the work of
philosophers and theoreticians. As stated in the previous chapter, this philosophical debate
has existed in various other incarnations since at least the ancient Greeks and in addition to
the work of philosophers, this debate has been continued in narrative works, which reach
equally far back into history. Whether one looks to the mythology of the Judeo-Christian
tradition or to the Greek myths of Hephaestus, Pandora, and of course Prometheus, narratives
of artificial humans have existed concurrently to the abstract theoretical understandings of their
respective ages. It is not surprising, then, that along with these Greek myths, elements of
Ancient Greek humanism have also permeated the intellectual lineages from the
Enlightenment to posthumanism. Building upon Protagoras’s famous idea that “man is the
measure of all things” (Plato 151d7-e3) the humanism of the Enlightenment endeavored to set

56
forth a new Age of Reason with the human at its center. Since then, post-Enlightenment
epistemologies find distant roots in Ancient Greek thinking,32 but even more readily in the
humanistic values of the Enlightenment itself, and in doing so make use of artificial humans in
fiction as a means to experiment with various incarnations of consciousness.
As Horst Glaser and Sabine Rossbach write “Wherever one comes across examples of
the artificial human, one can be sure that they are not the first of their kind. They were always
there, moving and sleeping amongst us. … All these artificial constructs, whether mechanical
or biological, sooner or later claim (or are claimed to be) Promethean.” (8) Similarly to Glaser’s
and Rossbach’s claim, Ihab Hassan’s idealized vision of posthumanism, and its figurehead,
Prometheus, function as a solution to the long-standing epistemological-ontological discourse.
Hassan’s appropriation of Prometheus as the rebellious figure forging a new way in spite of the
gods, unfortunately, does not have the lasting effects hoped for in “Prometheus as Performer.”
Rather the schism between epistemologies and ontologies arises anew, phoenix-like, in the
decades following Hassan’s article. Even if the dividing lines of the conflict still remain, both the
epistemological and ontological sides are shaped by the technologies and philosophies of the
epochs that produced them.
These epochs—German idealism, phenomenology, and posthumanism—have all, on
one hand, arisen since the Enlightenment as attempts at offering solutions to problematic
elements in previous thinking, but on the other served to perpetuate the core values of the
Enlightenment in forms tailored to the technology and culture of the day. Philosopher John
Gray asserts that “In the late modern period in which we live, the Enlightenment project is

32

Plato’s epistemology contrasts with Democratus’ materialism, but it was not until German idealism and
romanticism that the debate began taking its current form.

57
affirmed chiefly for fear of the consequences of abandoning it” (215). Gray’s pessimism finds
itself in good company with support from, among others, Max Horkheimer and Theodor
Adorno. By arguing that because of the rise of Nazism and Stalinism, both World Wars, the
Holocaust, and other atrocities of the twentieth century, the Age of Reason can officially be
declared dead. While I do not intend to disagree with Gray, Adorno, or Horkheimer that the
idealistic goals of the Enlightenment have not successfully been achieved in practice, the goals
themselves have indeed survived and are given new life in works of science fiction, and
especially in posthumanism. Gene Roddenberry, creator of Star Trek, famously said in an
interview that “science fiction is the last place a philosopher can operate” (Trek Nation). While
Roddenberry’s claim may prove too restrictive in his formulation, this chapter will demonstrate
that science fiction, especially as it is tied to epistemological posthumanism, offers continued
life to the Enlightenment’s goals and ideals along with, and as fundamental parts of, the
engagement with various elements of Enlightenment thinking.
Much ink has been spilled in the articulation of exactly what constitutes the goals of the
Enlightenment including works by Descartes, Kant, Wieland, and others. Descartes’ cogito
ergo sum places Enlightenment thinking firmly within a new epistemological tradition. Kant
begins his “Beantwortung auf der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?” with the oft-quoted “Aufklärung
ist der Ausgang des Menschen aus seiner selbst-verschuldeten Unmündigkeit” (9). Wieland
offers six questions and six answers as to the nature of Enlightenment with the recurring motifs
of light and seeing as central to enlightening oneself; however, it is the Marquis de Condorcet
who succeeds in enumerating what the goals are of the Age of Reason. “Our hopes for the
future condition of the human race can be subsumed under three important heads: the
abolition of inequality between nations, the progress of equality within each nation, and the

58
true perfection of mankind” (27). The argument is easily made that because of gender
inequality, colonialism, racism, and inequality in the accessibility to knowledge, the
Enlightenment failed before it even began—before the Terror in France following the
Revolution and the atrocities outlined by Horkheimer and Adorno.
As demonstrated here by Kant and Condorcet, and elsewhere by numerous thinkers,
the Enlightenment’s goals boil down to the fundamental belief in the capabilities of these
humans. While the years since the Enlightenment have been fraught with examples of how it
has failed, there has persisted a faith in its fundamental humanism, which has been explored,
tested, adapted, and demonstrated in texts throughout the last two centuries. These postEnlightenment re-engagements with humanism have taken various forms; however, they have
found a most natural fit with the theme of the artificial human in fiction and, given Descartes’
contribution to Enlightenment thinking, epistemological philosophies.
Beginning with the presupposition that conscious existence is primarily a mental
phenomenon, these authors have placed their readers and their characters face to face with
humanoid bodies lacking consciousness, grotesque and undead beings with human minds,
and eventually machines capable of complex thought and reasoning. As varied are the forms
and consciousnesses that are imagined by these authors, so too are the capabilities these
artificial Others are endowed with. Further they provide a point from which human characters
relate to, or distance themselves from, their artificial analogs, and often offer insightful
commentary on the humans’ own actions from an external perspective.
In tracing the theoretical discourse that I outlined in the previous chapter through works
of fiction from the early nineteenth century to the present, a varied and complex lineage of

59
artificial humans comes into focus. Beginning with the clockwork Olimpia and grotesque
Creature produced by Dr. Frankenstein, these ideas evolved into the beautiful and seductive
Futura in Metropolis (1927) and uncanny wax sculptures in Das Wachsfigurenkabinett (1924)
before taking on the form of the shape-shifting alien Odo in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine and
the geth in The Mass Effect Trilogy. The authors of these works draw upon, and contribute to,
the larger epistemological-ontological discourse that has quietly pervaded the intellectual
atmosphere for the last two centuries. As texts involving artificial humans increase in frequency
and popularity through the twentieth and into the twenty-first centuries, the narratives
surrounding them necessarily evolve in thematic complexity, but at the same time retain key
elements of their predecessors, as well as elements of humanistic philosophy.
The primary function of the artificial figures in these texts is to provide more information
about humans’ own struggle to understand themselves, their existence, and their
consciousness. In doing so, these works leading up to and comprising epistemological
posthumanism engage with, and attempt to reconcile the humanistic goals of the
Enlightenment. The artificial creations are human analogues in a dual sense: they are made in
the human form but still distinctly Other, and they allow the authors to explore human
existence by offering the distance required for such an examination. The next two chapters will
function in tandem to trace the epistemological-ontological discourse has been picked up and
furthered in fictional narratives. This chapter will trace the epistemological arguments, and
chapter three will focus on the ontological side. Both of these chapters should be considered
as two halves of a larger whole and to that end, will often share textual sources with hypertext
linking the two sides. By constructing my argument in this way rather than with the
epistemological and ontological together in one chapter, I will be much more easily able to

60
demonstrate how each school of thought has evolved over the past two hundred years and the
cross-chapter references will help to illuminate the interconnectedness of these competing
ideologies.

Romanticism
With texts as well-researched and often discussed as Der Sandmann and Frankenstein,
it would be easy to claim that they are already fully understood. I believe, however, that the
wealth of scholarship on these texts and the myriad points of view on offer underscores the
numerous connections between these narratives and contemporary schools of thought.
Indeed, the sentiment that German romanticism has already been fully explored was present in
A. W. Porterfield’s 1916 article on on the topic, in which he writes:
In view of the encyclopaedic mass of material that has been written on German
Romanticism, it would seem that everything concerning it has been said; that it is
too late to be ambitious; or that there remain only time and place for an
application of that not wholly enviable sort of ambition which exhausts itself in the
attempted refutation of canonized opinions. (479)
While Portenfield’s sentiment is still felt nearly a century later among many scholars, the
exploration of links between the past and present readily offers fresh perspectives on
otherwise well-understood topics and underscores their contribution to contemporary thinking.
As epistemological reactions against the Enlightenment progressed through the last two
centuries, they not only incorporated elements of previous epistemologies, they also found

61
themselves facing various elements of the Enlightenment itself. While there are many rote
Fäden linking romanticism to posthumanism, one stretches directly back through romanticism
to the core of the Enlightenment itself: the motif of eyes, light, and seeing. Christoph Martin
Wieland, one of the most prolific writers of the German Enlightenment writes in “Sechs Fragen
zur Aufklärung:”
Was ist Aufklärung? Das weiß jedermann, der vermittelst eines Paars sehender
Augen erkennen gelernt hat, worin der Unterschied zwischen Hell und Dunkel,
Licht und Finsternis besteht.…sobald Licht gebracht wird, klären sich die Sachen
auf, werden sichtbar und können voneinander unterschieden werden - doch wird
dazu zweierlei notwendig erfordert: 1) daß Licht genug vorhanden sei, und 2)
dass diejenige, welche dabei sehen sollen, weder blind noch gelbsüchtig seien,
noch durch irgendeine andere Ursache verhindert werden, sehen zu können oder
sehen zu wollen. (23)
Wieland’s essay continues through the next five questions with variations on this same
answer: one needs favorable external conditions (enough light to see), correctly functioning
instruments of perception (eyes and mind), and the will to apply the latter to the former.
Wieland’s metaphors of light and seeing are picked up by E.T.A. Hoffmann in Der Sandmann
and turned into one of the most complex and often interpreted motifs of the story. Hoffmann’s
integration of Wieland’s metaphor with Fichtean philosophy and a mechanical human analog
produces a text that may be read as a case study of an individual failing to accomplish the
tasks set out by Fichte.

62
Published as part of Hoffmann’s collection Nachtstücke, Der Sandmann tells the story of
Nathaniel’s attempts to come to grips with his childhood fears, his relationship with his fiancée
Clara, and his infatuation with the automaton Olimpia. Scholarly work on the piece has
included perspectives from feminism, psychoanalysis,33 narratology, and a wealth of others34
and the recurring theme of sight has received attention from countless scholars. Viewed as
part of a larger progression from German idealism to posthumanism, as well as a text that
modifies and and reworks Enlightenment thinking, Der Sandmann provides a necessary first
step in the integration of this epistemological lineage into fiction, as well as a re-engagement
with the notion that “man is the measure of all things.”
It is clear from Hoffmann’s letter correspondences that he was acquainted with Fichte,35
and indeed they were present in Königsberg at Kant’s lectures, in Berlin, and in Warsaw
concurrently. It is unlikely, according to Hartmut Steineke, that Hoffmann read Fichte’s
Wissenschaftslehre directly; however, that is not to say that Hoffmann was ignorant of the
philosopher’s ideas.
Das Identitätsproblem wird in der Frühromantik zu einer zentralen Thematik der
Philosophie, insbesondere Fichte befaßte sich intensiv mit diesen Fragen. Er
setzte das Ich absolut; es bringt sich in der Reflexion selbst hervor. Es setzt sich

33

Freud’s essay Das Unheimliche deals directly with Der Sandmann to illustrate Freud’s conception of the
phenomenon of the uncanny.

34

For a feminist perspective, see “Women and Artists: E.T.A Hoffmann’s Implicit Critique of Early
Romanticism” by Margarete Kohlenbach. Narratology is explored in John M. Ellis’ “Clara, Nathanael and the
Narrator: Interpreting Hoffmann's Der Sandmann.” Other excellent articles on Der Sandmann include Maria
Tatar’s “E.T.A. Hoffmann's Der Sandmann: Reflection and Romantic Irony” and Raimund Belgardt’s “Der Künstler
und die Puppe: Zur Interpretation von Hoffmanns ‘Der Sandmann’.”
35
In a letter to Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel dated 12.12.1807, Hoffmann describes his social circle
including Fichte, Schleiermacher, Chamisso and others by name.

63
als Ich und diesem entgegen die Welt als Nicht-Ich—Gedanken, die bald von der
literarischen Intelligenz aufgenommen wurden. Hoffmann hat Fichte zwar
wahrscheinlich nicht im Original gelesen, kannte aber dessen Ideen aber durch
popularphilosophische Darstellungen. (269)
Steinecke’s claim that Hoffmann was familiar with Fichte’s ideas supports my working
understanding of the contributions to this epistemological-ontological discourse: namely that
the ideas expressed in both philosophical and narrative works were so prevalent within the
atmosphere of each epoch that they compelled engagement with the ideas, whether directly or
implicitly.
Der Sandmann (1817)
If Porterfield's earlier quotation in response to critiques of continuing to research
German romanticism generally is to be accepted as true, then this sentiment is at least as true
specifically for Hoffmann’s Der Sandmann. While numerous scholars have engaged with the
text from myriad angles, the Fichtean elements of Hoffmann’s text remain unexplored. The
most widely accepted interpretation of Der Sandmann begins with understanding of the
characters as archetypes—Nathanael as the romantic poet, Clara as rational and enlightened,
Spalanzani as a figure of Enlightenment empiricism and so forth.36 Rather than follow
Portenfeld’s argument that the only means left of engaging with such a widely read and studied
text is to attempt to overturn the canonical understanding of it, my analysis builds upon the

36

This interpretation was not only offered as standard each time this text came up in literature seminars,
but is also dominant among Lektürschlüssel published by Germanistik faculty on the Internet including this one
from the TU in Dresden (http://esem.bszbw.de/slub/repository/Marchesi+Lingstedt.pdf;jsessionid=F30A342BE648155EB3D1D08E17A109EE?id=19462)
and this from Digitale Schule Bayern (http://www.digitale-schule-bayern.de/dsdaten/587/990.pdf)

64
canon of scholarship and reintegrates the philosophical perspective of the day into the lens of
interpretation, thereby redirecting the way the text is viewed.
While the canonical understanding of Nathanael presents him as the prototypical
romantic artist, other scholars paint him either as a fully fledged madman, or as well on his way
to insanity.37 Nathanael’s understanding of the world hinges on the recurring terrors that were
originally experienced in childhood surrounding Coppelius, the Sandman, alchemy, and his
father’s death. Compounding this are his near constant attempts to express himself through
poetry to his fiancée, Clara, and her equally constant rejections of Nathanael’s worldview. As
reported by the narrator, Nathanael falls into a deep depression after encountering Coppola
and is convinced that a dark force is controlling his fate.
Alle fühlten das, da Nathanael gleich in den ersten Tagen in seinem ganzen
Wesen durchaus verändert sich zeigte. Er versank ein düstere Träumereien, und
trieb es bald so seltsam, wie man es niemals von ihm gewohnt gewesen. Alles,
das ganze Leben war ihm Traum und Ahnung geworden; wimmer sprach er
davon, wie jeder Mensch, sich frei wähnend, nur dunklen Mächten zum
grausamen Spiel diene, vergeblich lehne man sich dagegen auf, demütig müsse
man sich dem fügen, was das Schicksal verhängt habe. Er ging so weit, zu
behaupten, dass es töricht sei, wenn man glaube, in Kunst und Wissenschaft
nach selbsttätiger Willkür zu schaffen; denn die Begeisterung, in der man nur zu
schaffen fähig sei, kommen nicht aus dem eigenen Innern, sondern sei das

37

See Ursula D. Lawson’s “Pathological Time in E.T.A. Hoffmann’s ‘Der Sandmann,’” John M. Ellis’ “Clara,
Nathanael and the Narrator: Interpreting Hoffmann's Der Sandmann,” and others. Maria Tatar considers
Nathanael’s madness as one potential possibility for Nathanael’s situation in “E.T.A. Hoffmann's "Der Sandmann":
Reflection and Romantic Irony.”

65
Einwirken irgendeines außer uns selbst liegenden höheren Prinzips. (Hoffmann
21)
Nathanael’s feelings of depression and limitation by outside forces reflect events in Fichte’s
own life before he came under Kant’s influence. After the financier of his studies passed away,
Fichte was forced to provide his own income by working as a tutor and pursuing, and ultimately
failing at creating, a writing career (Fichte Biography). After his depression nearly led him to
suicide, he became acquainted with Kant’s transcendental idealism, which in its focus on
individual moral freedom changed the way Fichte saw the world and eventually lead to the
Wissenschaftslehre (Estes and Bowman 1-2).
Central to Fichte’s thinking is the definition of the subject as freely positing itself. This
freedom, as well as the positing, is not absolute. Built out of the subject’s self-positing of the
Ich is the equal but opposing positing of the outside world, the Nicht-Ich. As explained in the
previous chapter, the Ich strives constantly for absolute freedom while at the same time being
limited by the counterforce of the world of objects that the subject itself has produced, the
Nicht-Ich. For Fichte, these two mutually striving and limiting forces are resolved through the
third principle, which guarantees their equilibrium and mutual necessity for coexistence.
Fichte’s self-positing Ich as well as the Nicht-ich that it produces are built out of his attempt to
ground the possibility of all knowledge within the subject itself, rather than continue the duality
of phenomena and noumena that Kant outlined. Fichte grounds this possibility of all knowledge
within the subject’s own identity, which he renders through the logical proposition A=A
(Grundlage 53).

66
Through Fichte’s philosophy, Nathanael is in part correct that there is a dark power
influencing his life and causing his feelings of depression and fear; however, because in
Fichte’s view, the frightful Nicht-ich that torments Nathanael comes from Nathanael’s own mind
itself, Clara’s refutations of him are also valid. In Clara’s letter to Nathanael she tells him:
Gibt es eine dunkle Macht, die so recht feindlich und verräterisch einen Faden in
unser Inneres legt, woran sie uns dann festpackt und fortzieht auf einem
gefahrvollen verderblichen Wege, den wir sonst nicht betreten haben würden gibt es eine solche Macht, so muss sie in uns sich, wie wir selbst gestalten, ja
unser Selbst werden; denn nur so glauben wir an sie und räumen ihr den Platz
ein, dessen sie bedarf, um jenes geheime Werk zu vollbringen. (14)
Clara goes on to describe her conversation with Lothar in which he reaffirms her idealist claim
for the existence of the external world and ground for knowledge.
Es ist auch gewiss, fügt Lothar hinzu, dass die dunkle psychiches Macht, haben
wir uns durch uns selbst ihr hingegeben, oft fremde Gestalten, die die Außenwelt
ins den Weg wirft, in unser Inneres hineinzieht, sodass wir selbst nur den Geist
entzünden, der, wie wir in wunderlicher Täuschung glauben, aus jener Gestalt
spricht. Es ist das Phantom unseres eigenen Ichs, dessen innige Verwandtschaft
und dessen tiefe Einwirkung auf unsere Gemüt uns in die Hölle wirft, oder in den
Himmel verzückt. (15)
Clara and Lothar thus do not reveal themselves as the opposites to Nathanael’s romanticism,
rather they represent well-adjusted and correctly functioning examples of Fichte’s
transcendental idealism. The freedom expressed by their subjectivities reaffirms the

67
supremacy and foundational nature of the Ich in grounding both reality and knowledge.
Conversely, Nathanael’s Ich has produced itself as fundamentally reactionary and fearful
against the Nicht-ich that his consciousness itself produces.
Despite the discord between Nathanael and most other characters in the novella,
Nathanael remains adamant that his worldview is correct going so far as to call Clara a
“lebloses, verdammtes Automat” (25). His view that he experiences reality on a deeper level
than Clara (and implicitly most everyone else), offers a romantic critique of Wieland’s
conception of Enlightenment. Whereas Wieland considered Enlightenment to hinge on the
correct perception of things objectively observable to all given the right conditions (enough
light, and correctly functioning eyes and mind), the antagonism Hoffmann constructs between
Nathanael and Clara regarding the nature of external reality reinforces Fichte’s notion that
external reality is fundamentally a mental phenomenon. Both Nathanael and Clara would
argue that they are seeing more clearly than the other, that is to say that their perspectives are
correct. The mutual existence of both positions, like the mutual necessity of the Ich and Nichtich, is guaranteed through Fichte’s idealism.
The motif of sight and lenses that is prevalent from the beginning to the end of Der
Sandmann not only harkens back to Wieland’s notion of Enlightenment and symbolizes the
many perspectives that one may use to view the world, it also mirrors the metaphor Fichte
used to explain the subjectivity of the Ich. Fichte writes “Das Ich ist eine Tätigkeit, der ein Auge
eingesetzt ist” (Sämtliche Werke II 249). The self-positing Ich, then, is an activity38 that sets
forth from with particular perspective. Fichte carries the metaphor of the eye through several

38

Fichte’s subjectivity is an activity, which is in contrast to Descartes’ res cogitans, a substance.

68
works, with his point summarized by Günter Zöller in his monograph Fichte’s Transcendental
Philosophy:
Typically...the eye stands for the element of knowing (“seeing”) that is originally
and indissolubly united with the activity of the I. In one such instance, Fichte
reconstructs the coming about of the I as the unification of the “blindly” felt drive to
absolute independence with the “sight” provided by thinking, a process in which
“eyes are, as it were inserted into the drive that is itself blind.” The metaphor of
the eye here serves to represent the moment of consciousness in the original
activity of the I. Fichte’s talk about eyes being inserted into the drive should not be
taken, though, to suggest the implantation of some further organ into an already
functioning organism. Rather the eyes have always already been inserted, just as
the positing of the I is originally also a positing-as-positing. At one point Fichte
even conflates the terminologies of positing and seeing by calling the I “an eye
that posits itself.” (35-36)
The metaphor of the eye for Fichte is so central to his understanding of subjectivity that it is
impossible to conceive of an Ich without its Augen. Fichte takes the ocular metaphor further in
three sonnets from 1805 which further the connection between the philosopher and elements
crucial to Hoffmann’s text, in this case Nathanael. The narrator of Fichte’s sonnets is searching
for the divine inspiration that he has lost. After looking into the eye of Urania, the muse of
astronomy, he declares that God is nothing (Nachgelassene 347-48).39

39

For further explication of these sonnets see The Retreat of Representation: The Concept of Darstellung
in German Critical Discourse by Martha B. Helfer, p. 74.

69
With eyes as the core of Fichte’s notion of subjectivity, it comes as no surprise that
Nathanael’s fear and anxiety surrounding the disembodiment of eyes to be deeply existential.
While Freud’s reading of Hoffmann’s work in his essay “Das Unheimliche” from 1919 equates
Nathanael’s fear of losing his eyes to castration anxiety, reading Nathanael’s fear through a
Fichtean lens shifts the focus from losing his virility to losing the very essence of his
subjectivity. Nathanael’s childhood fears are rekindled when Coppola appears at his door one
day. Nathanael’s horror as Coppola empties his bag of barometers, lenses, and disembodied
eyes brings him face to face with the notion that his subjectivity may be swapped out for any
other, simply by exchanging the eyes. The materialization of epistemological subjectivity in this
way also undermines his conviction that his Dichtergabe endows him with a deeper connection
to, and understanding of, existence.
After recovering from the horror of Coppola’s bounty of disembodied subjectivities,
Nathanael purchases a telescope, a Perspektiv, in order to see into Spalanzani’s workshop
and better observe Olimpia. Nathanael’s infatuation with Olimpia has been the subject of much
scrutiny from scholars. Often she is conceived of as a counterpoint to Clara, with whose
refutations of his work Nathanael is becoming increasingly frustrated. However, through this
Fichtean lens, it is Olimpia who is the antithesis of Nathanael, not Clara as both humans have
self-posited subjectivities, whereas the automaton does not. Despite being endowed with eyes
herself, Fichte’s metaphor for the Ich cannot overcome the clockwork and materialistic nature
of her bodily existence. Nevertheless, Nathanael is drawn to her at the expense of Clara and
the rest of his life.
Nathanael’s subjectivity is one dominated by an out of control Nicht-Ich in the form of
the Coppelius-Coppola figure, the Sandman, and his depression. Nathanael lacks the

70
reconciliation between the Ich and Nicht-ich (Fichte’s third principle) that characterizes both
Clara and Lothar; rather, Nathanael is drawn to Olimpia specifically as a being lacking
subjectivity. Through Nathanael’s representation as a romantic-idealist subject, as self-positing
but not balanced Ich, Olimpia appears as a non-positing and equally unbalanced, empirical
Nicht-ich. As two disparate entities Nathanael and Olimpia represent an embodiment of
Fichte’s “law of reflection concerning opposites.” Like Fichte’s first two principles, all thinking
for the philosopher is oppositional; that is to say that just as the Ich and Nicht-Ich limit the
striving of one another, they determine the boundaries of their opposite. The basis for thinking,
then, is the opposition between what is undetermined and determinable for the subject.
Through the determination of the undetermined, the unity of the opposites is solidified and
guaranteed. It is as an undetermined but determinable entity that Nathanael sees Olimpia. She
is for Nathanael whatever he wants her to be, and through that union of opposites that he
experiences in his attraction to her, Nathanael is finally able to complete Fichte’s third principle
and reconcile the mutually necessary existence of both the Ich and Nicht-ich. For Nathanael
Olimpia is the first element of the Nicht-ich that he is successfully able to determine and not be
himself overrun by the Nicht-ich’s limitation of his Ich.
The unification of the romantic-idealist and empirical through Nathanael and Olimpia
anticipates Hassan’s unification of opposites in the figure of Prometheus. While the unification
of Prometheus as trickster and thief with also being the giver of technology and knowledge to
humankind calls for a drive toward unity in Hassan’s new conception of posthumanism, this
calamitous unification of Nathanael’s fundamental, and albeit poorly functioning, idealism with
the pure materialist empiricism of Olimpia offers a literary take on how the epistemological and
ontological reactions to the Enlightenment have been striving toward unification from the very

71
beginning. Fichte’s idealist philosophy, while still grounding itself firmly in the epistemological
tradition, provides both a means for analyzing and understanding Hoffmann’s text and a call for
the unification of opposites that anticipates the same from Hassan. The motif of eyes and sight
that is so central to both Fichte and Der Sandmann carries over into Mary Shelley’s
Frankenstein. Whereas Der Sandmann concerned itself primarily with the mechanical and Ichless Other as a counterpart to the runaway Nicht-ich of Nathanael’s subjectivity, Frankenstein
examines an artificially created individual as he posits and develops a subjectivity all his own.
Frankenstein (1818)
While the previous text involved a mechanical human analogue, Mary Shelley has her
protagonist bring a living flesh and blood creation into the world. Shelley’s novel clearly
foregrounds the antagonism between modern scientific progress, as represented by the
scientific establishment at his university, and the dreams of Renaissance alchemists, which are
brought back to life through Victor Frankenstein’s own mind. One widely accepted reading of
Frankenstein expands this by examining Victor as a mad scientist, single-mindedly focused on
discovering the secret of life, and his Creature as the uncontrollable, physical embodiment of
science going too far. Further readings have analyzed Victor’s attempt to create life without
need of a woman, especially in light of the lack of a maternal figure through most of his own
existence, others have examined Shelley’s novel in the historical context of the aftershocks of
the French Revolution,40 and still others have focused on the Creature as monster with all of

40

See Anne K. Mellor’s Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters (1989), Sandra M. Gilbert and
Susan Gubar’s The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagination
(1979, 2000), and Gregory Dart’s Rousseau, Robespierre, and English Romanticism (1999).

72
the horrific alchemical implications that such a theme brings.41 Whereas Hoffmann’s text
depicted Nathanael and Olimpia as opposites that are necessary for the reconciliation of
Nathanael’s subjectivity with the external world, Frankenstein imagines the first hand
experience of the Creature himself as he struggles with equally Fichtean issues of self
definition. This epistemological approach42 to Shelley’s text will focus on the Creature’s journey
to posit himself, his existence, and the world around him, as well as on the ever-present ocular
motif previously presented by Fichte and, previously, Hoffmann. As Frankenstein is a text
drawing heavily upon Fichtean epistemology, the Creature’s quest to create his own identity
also contains foreshadowing of Husserl’s phenomenology and issues surrounding the creation
of the geth in Mass Effect,43 which reinforce the epistemological, and visual, line of influence
from romanticism to posthumanism.
The symbolic confluence of the Fichtean I with the subject's eye serves to ground the
very first intersubjective look between Frankenstein and his creation.
It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment of my
toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected the instruments
of life around me, that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay
at my feet. It was already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against
the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the half41

See Chris Baldick’s In ‘Frankenstein’’s Shadow: Myth Monstrosity and Nineteenth-Century Writing
(1990), Fred Botting’s Making Monstrous: ‘Frankenstein’, Criticism, Theory (1991), and George Levine and U. C.
Knoeflmacher’s (eds) The Endurance of “Frankenstein” (1979).
42
Reading Frankenstein through the lense of ontological philosophies would focus on Victor’s
understanding of “natural philosophy” and his ability to build and reanimate dead tissue into a living being. The
unity of the ontology of Victor’s approach and the epistemology of the Creature represents another unification of
opposites as was explored with Hassan in chapter one and through Nathanael and Olimpia in the previous
section.
43
Husserl’s examples within phenomenology focus mainly on visual perception of phenomena and the geth
feature flashlights surrounding their ocular sensors

73
extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard,
and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs. (30)
Recalling Fichte’s quote “Das Ich ist eine Tätigkeit, der ein Auge eingesetzt ist”
(Sämtliche Werke II 249) Shelley brings the motif of the eye into the Creature’s quest to posit
his subjectivity from the very beginning. Victor’s horror continues later that night when he
awakens to find the Creature standing over him.
I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth
chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and yellow light of
the moon, as it forced its way through the window-shutters, I beheld the wretch, the
miserable monster whom I had created. He held up the curtain of the bed; and his
eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he
muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks.
He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was stretched out,
seemingly to detain me, but I escaped, and rushed down stairs. (Shelley 31)
Victor’s remark drawing the Creature’s eyes into question points also to an understanding of
the ocular representation of a subject’s consciousness. As it is only the Creature’s eyes that
horrify Victor, and not the rest of his form, Victor’s fright stems from a similar source as
Nathanael’s when Coppola empties his bag of lenses, barometers, and eyes and again later
when Olimpia’s eyes and body are separated. Where Nathanael’s fright came first from
encountering the ocular half of Fichte’s Ich without a body and mind to perform the Tätigkeit,
Victor’s is the converse: he is face to face with an acting body that lacks the Auge required for
the self-positing subjectivity.

74
One defining factor that sets Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre apart from other philosophies
of mind that came before him, especially that of Descartes, is that for Fichte subjectivity is
always an action rather than a substance, as it was for the earlier French philosopher. This has
profound consequences for Fichte’s conception of intersubjectivity, a necessary condition for
the subject to posit its Ich. Through understanding subjectivity as an action, Fichte does not
encounter the problem of other minds as Descartes does, and moreover, intersubjectivity is
necessary for the full realization of Fichte’s actively self-positing subject. Allen Wood44 neatly
and concisely sums up Fichte’s intersubjectivity in his paper “Fichte’s Intersubjective I” stating:
My own self-consciousness begins with my consciousness of another’s
consciousness as addressing me (“summoning” me). This means that the mental
states of others, as perceived by someone other than the I whose states they are,
are as transcendentally necessary to the self-consciousness of an I as are its own
states. Fichte’s argument is that transcendentally, the nature of mind is constituted
as much by my awareness of the mentality of others as by my awareness of my
own mentality. (15)
Frankenstein’s Creature is not only literally called forth from a state of death to one of life, but
once he is alive, the Creature experiences the beginning of Fichte’s Auffordern as soon as he
and his creator make contact for the first time, although the Creature’s intersubjective
experiences will not prove to be the positive source of support that Fichte had in mind.

44

Wood’s impetus for delving into Fichte’s conception of intersubjectivity rests on his argument that “as
philosophers of mind, we are all recovering Cartesians (3).” Wood’s article underscores my larger argument that
current issues in posthumanism, especially the construction of and debate surrounding epistemological and
ontological lines of thought, were first constructed in their current form in German idealism and romanticism.

75
While the Creature later describes his journey of self-discovery, it is through his
recounting of his initial interaction with Victor that he recalls the tone for his view of himself
throughout the rest of the novel to have been set—a view which is fundamentally negative and
is reinforced by nearly every other human the Creature comes into contact with. Victor’s horror
at the Creature’s yellow, watery, and unfocusing eyes, his symbolized Ich-less existence,
functions as only the first in a series of failed attempts by the Creature to solidify human
contact and thereby experience Fichte’s Auffordern. While positive human contact is withheld
from the Creature due to his appearance, he eventually uses what little he had to begin to posit
his Ich.
As the Creature recounts his history to Victor later in the novel, the Creature continually
returns to his sight more frequently than any other sense as reflective of his level of
development.
A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard, and smelt, at
the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before I learned to distinguish
between the operations of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a
stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I was obliged to shut my eyes.
Darkness then came over me, and troubled me; but hardly had I felt this, when, by
opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light poured in upon me again. … Before,
dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but
now I found that I could wander on at liberty, with no obstacles which I could not
either surmount or avoid. (Shelley 80)

76
After Victor flees his home in response to his horror at the Creature, the Creature himself,
feeling rejected by his creator, heads off for the forest. While there, the Creature recalls
becoming acquainted with the sun and moon as sources of light and, after a while, his “eyes
became accustomed to the light, and to perceive objects in their right forms…” (82). Becoming
accustomed to the light coincides also with his ability to “[distinguish] the insect from the herb,
and, by degrees, one herb from another” (82).
The Creature’s account of learning to use his senses and visually perceive the world
around him recall Wieland’s account of Enlightenment.
Das weiß jedermann, der vermittelst eines Paars sehender Augen erkennen
gelernt hat, worin der Unterschied zwischen Hell und Dunkel, Licht und Finsternis
besteht. Im Dunklen sieht man entweder gar nichts oder wenigstens nicht so klar,
dass man die Gegenstände recht erkennen und voneinander unterschieden
werden. (23)
The Creature, through his insistent desire to learn about the world around him and posit his
own subjectivity, fulfills the first of Wieland’s criteria for Enlightenment, namely that enough
light is present at hand. Not only does he strive against the pain of his eyes to be function in
the day rather than at night, he is working to overcome his ill-functioning eyes in order to see,
understand, and know both the physical world around him and himself as an individual. Sight is
also what draws the Creature to an abandoned campfire in the woods, as well as to a village,
and ultimately to the hovel where he quietly observes the De Lacey family.
Despite the substantial progress made by the Creature to posit his subjectivity in the
beginning, the sight of him fills anyone who sees him, from Victor to the villagers, with terror.

77
Importantly, the Creature has not yet perceived his own image. The Creature can be said to
have been acting on instinct, driven to alleviate pain, find comfort, et cetera; however, his own
characterization of his behavior is couched in his desire to find warmth in the cold or to find
food, rather than simply as reaction to negative stimuli.45 Of this initial state of being before a
subjectivity is posited, Fichte writes “Ich finde mich selbst, als mich selbst, nur wollend.
(Gesamtausgabe I/5 37). In the establishment of an Ich, Fichte characterizes two features that
are brought together in his first principle: Tun and Sehen. The Tun corresponds both to the
absolute activity that the Ich will eventually establish itself into being, but also as the state of
volition that he describes before the self-reflection that allows one to posit an Ich in the first
place. Sehen comes about when the subject has gained an awareness of him- or herself as
more than just a willing, but also an object in the world and it is only through the eventual
acceptance of both of these sides that the Ich may be successfully posited (Gesamtausgabe
I/5 53). When attempting to communicate with Victor, his creator, as well as during a foray into
the village, Frankenstein’s Creature yet lacks this Fichtean concept of himself as he is
perceived by other people; he only has his desires to satiate his hunger, find warmth, and
interact with fellow beings.
The Creature is aware of Victor’s reaction to his appearance, but knowingly risks the
same again when he approaches the village to find food and shelter. After being violently run
out of town, he finds shelter in a hovel abutting a cottage in the country where he remains
undetected for over a year while he watches the De Lacey family and learns about them. After
spending the winter observing the family and growing ever fonder of them, the Creature

45

This description of his motivations will parallel the character Odo in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine as he
comes to know himself as a shapeshifter and sapient being.

78
catches his reflection in a pool of water and is suddenly brought face to face with himself as an
object, albeit a horrible and terrifying one.
I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers, —their grace, beauty, and
delicate complexions; but how was I terrified when I viewed myself in a
transparent pool! At first I started back, unable to believe that it was indeed I who
was reflected in the mirror; and when I became fully convinced that I was in reality
the monster that I am, I was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence
and mortification. Alas! I did not yet know the fatal effects of this miserable
deformity. (Shelley 90)
The turn from winter to spring, and with it the increasing length of day and brightness of the
sun, coincide with the Creature’s further subjective development. After learning their customs
and language by peering through a small hole into the cottage, the Creature decides that he
would like to express his love for the family, but now that he knows his appearance, he
endeavors to confess his feelings to the blind father after his children are away. His intentions
and understanding of the implications demonstrate that the Creature has finally posited his Ich.
Rather than being summoned by means of a proper Fichtean intersubjective Auffordern,
the Creature is continually rejected by every human who can see him. Much of the Auffordern
that led to the Creature developing the courage to speak with De Lacey came from a collection
of books he found in the forest, among them Paradise Lost.
Like Adam, I was created, apparently united by no link to any other being in
existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had
come forth from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous,

79
guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to converse with, and
acquire knowledge from, beings of a superior nature: but I was wretched,
helpless, and alone. (Shelley 102)
Immediately thereafter, the Creature tells Victor of the journal that was in the coat he stole from
him containing entries recounting the four months leading up the Creature’s “birth.” After
reading the journal, the Creature recounts his reaction:
‘Hateful day when I received life!’ I exclaimed in agony. ‘Cursed creator! Why did
you form a monster so hideous that even you turned from me in disgust? God in
pity made man beautiful and alluring, after his own image; but my form is a filthy
type of yours, more horrid from its very resemblance...’ (Shelley 103)
Despite this uproar of emotion against his creator, the Creature calms himself by reminding
himself of the virtuous De Lacey family and convincing himself that by speaking to the blind
father alone, the family would eventually accept him. He has confidence that his
consciousness is fully formed, posited, and worthy of interaction—is simply his form that
affects people negatively.
While his plan may have worked, Felix and his companions come back to the cottage
earlier than expected and run the Creature out with even more violence than he’d experienced
in the village. Even after being forsaken by Victor, rejected by the villagers and by the De
Lacey family, the Creature has not yet acted as the monster others perceive him to be. The
final straw comes as the Creature saves a drowning girl and is shot in the arm by her
companion; at this point, the negative and hostile version of Fichte’s Auffordern has exerted its
final influence on the Creature. He has established his consciousness, and through the

80
influence of the humans who have come in contact with him, has given himself a direction:
revenge against his creator. The way the Creature has been summoned to posit his Ich has
involved numerous violent, horrific rejections and heartbreak.
While in the world of humans, the Creature experiences consistent limitation
(determination) by the external world; he is constantly the subject of rejection, violence, and
hatred. He first tries to match his Ich to the Nicht-ich that has defined his existence, which only
leads him to commit violence himself and be subject to even more of it from humans. This,
however, is the converse of Fichte’s idealism and the Creature eventually gains the strength in
his Ich to posit a Nicht-ich of his own by withdrawing from the world of humans and thus
creating for himself the Nicht-ich that fits with his peaceful Ich. In the Creature’s isolation,
Fichte’s third principle reconciling the subject and the ideally created world of objects comes
into true existence for the Creature—so long as he is continually able to avoid Victor’s pursuit.
While sight played a fundamental role in Fichte’s philosophy as well as in the romantic
texts, it shows itself to be even more important in Husserl’s phenomenology in the early
twentieth century. While phenomenology is inclusive of all aspects of perceiving phenomena,
Husserl’s examples are primarily visual and continue the exploration of the link between these
epistemological philosophies and the metaphorical motif of sight. Concurrent to Husserl’s work
is the advent of film, which allows directors and cinematographers to explore this new stage of
the epistemological evolution beyond Fichte’s idealism. If ocular symbols and visual motifs
were strongly present in idealism and romanticism, they are fundamentally intrinsic to the
phenomenology and modernism of the early twentieth century.

81

Modernism
The elements that link the early twentieth century to the early nineteenth in terms of
intellectual thought and narrative themes are numerous to say the least. As I mentioned in the
previous chapter, Husserl spent a great deal of time studying Fichte, delivered lectures
devoted completely to the idealist’s work, and integrated Fichtean ideas into the
phenomenological46 process. While Husserl described himself as a transcendental idealist in
the tradition of Kant and Fichte, it is also of note that both Husserl and Fichte endeavored with
their philosophical thinking to redefine what it means to philosophize generally. Fichte’s
concept of the Wissenschaftslehre was intended to be an entirely new method that would
break with the problematic elements of previous thinkers’ work, including Kant. Husserl
similarly argued that phenomenology was a new method of philosophizing, one that was
focused on the direct lived experience of perceiving phenomena. Crucial to their similarity are
the conceptions of both Fichte’s Ich and the phenomenological process as actions that are
performed and are also intrinsically inherent to the consciousness that performs them. As it
was the self- and other-positing Ich that defined reality as constructed by the German idealists
of the nineteenth century, it is the lived experience of the phenomenological ego perceiving
phenomena that defines epistemology in the early twentieth century.
Just as philosophical thinking of phenomenology found a firm footing in German
idealism, so too did the motifs and themes of modernist narrative find a base upon which to
build in the work of the Romantics. Several romantic texts were adapted to the new medium of
46

I leave Wissenschaftslehre untranslated as it retains a cohesiveness of intent and element of technical
terminology in German that the English translation “Science of Knowledge” somehow loses. Phenomenology, on
the other hand, is so close in both languages that it loses nothing in translation. This will also apply to various
technical terms of phenomenology—I will make use of the German term when the English does not connote the
meaning of the word effectively enough.

82
film including James Whale’s version of Frankenstein (1931), an adaptation of the ballet
Coppélia inspired by Der Sandmann in the form of Ernst Lubitsch’s Die Puppe (1919), Paul
Wegener’s Der Golem: Wie er in die Welt kam (1920)47 and the Homunculus films.48 These
films not only brought these stories back to life, but also supplemented them with modernist
and phenomenological ideas, which demonstrate influence from both the works’ idealist roots
and the Zeitgeist of phenomenology in the early twentieth century.
Other works, such as Karel Čapek’s stage play R.U.R. (1920) and Fritz Lang’s
Metropolis (1927) present more advanced takes on the mechanical artificial human than were
offered in their romantic predecessors Der Sandmann and “Die Automata.”49 In both later
works, the robots50 do not always act in accord with the wishes of humans, and display much
more fully developed sentience than the automaton Olimpia in Der Sandmann or the Turk in
Hoffmann’s “Die Automata.” This technological evolution incorporates elements of individual
subjectivities on the part of the artificial humans, which invite exploration of the
phenomenological elements of intentionality, perspective, and embodiment as well as internal
and external horizons. Husserl’s conception of horizons, and his analysis of wax exhibits
themselves, play a central role in Paul Leni’s Das Wachsfigurenkabinett (1924) as the
nameless poet creates stories to accompany the wax figures in a traveling exhibit.

47

The stories surrounding the creation of golem reach back at least to the Talmud and the Bible; however,
there are also accounts of golem stories from Jakob Emden in the early to mid 18th century, Jacob Grimm,
Clemens Brentano, and Annette von Droste-Hülshoff in the early 19th century, and Abraham Tendlau and Detlev
von Liliencron in the mid to late 19th century. While the accounts by German authors were not always devoid of
anti-Semitism, their existence most assuredly influenced the creation of Wegener’s film.
48
Only the fourth Homunculus film exists in its entirety, and fragments remain of other works in the series.
49
This will be discussed in chapter 3.
50
Čapek’s construction of a noun to replace “automaton” or “android” out of the Czech word “robota”
meaning “forced labor” is well documented. It is also well documented that this play marks the origin of the word
for mechanical, sometimes humanoid, creations designed to complete tasks.

83
While the recurring motif of eyes and sight in the romantic texts is continued in
modernism, it is given new depth by the incorporation of ideas present in Husserl’s
phenomenological works. Like Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre before, Husserl’s phenomenology
dominated the philosophical discourse during the early decades of the twentieth century and
the concepts and perspectives articulated in his philosophy appear also in various forms within
narratives of the time. Husserl’s focus on sight for the majority of his examples not only carries
Fichte’s philosophical metaphor into modernism, but just as Fichte’s use of eyes and sight did
with romantic texts, the way phenomenology focuses on how phenomena are rendered
perceivable to consciousness as a necessary part of that consciousness itself continues the
epistemological focus from idealism into the new epoch.
While many of the texts mentioned above provide excellent examples of
phenomenological thought, I have chosen to focus on Paul Leni’s 1924 film Das
Wachsfigurenkabinett and Fritz Lang’s Metropolis from 1927. The focus in Leni’s film centers
on the perception of the wax figures in the museum by both the unnamed poet, the potential
visitors, and the film’s viewers. The context of the wax museum, and the medium of film
themselves encourage phenomenological perspectives while regarding the figures, and Leni’s
plot wherein the poet must write backstories for each individual serves to engage the
phenomenological observer more deeply in perceiving the forms at once as wax dummies and
intersubjectively as people “brought to life” by the stories. Metropolis also makes heavy use of
directed perception; however, in this case the subject is not a poet, but the villain Rotwang
aided by the devices in his laboratory. The electronic eye of the machine aids Rotwang in
capturing Maria’s image, which he then transplants onto Futura. Along with this futuristic
interpretation of directed perception, the film incorporates Husserl’s Lebenswelten into the very

84
structure of the city and relies on the existence or lack of intersubjective empathy to drive the
plot.
Das Wachsfigurenkabinett (1924)
Paul Leni’s film Das Wachsfigurenkabinett51 from 1924 tells the story of a poet-for-hire
who is commissioned to spin fictional tales about the figures in a waxworks exhibit. Presented
as part of a travelling carnival, the wax museum contains four figures of historical and literary
fame: Harun al-Rashid, Ivan the Terrible, Jack the Ripper,52 and Rinaldo Rinaldini. Leni
originally planned a four-part film, but due to the hyperinflation of the German currency and
collapse of the economy during filming in 1923, only two of the four episodes were properly
realized and the third “has to be seen as a kind of improvisation, albeit one with remarkable
visual concentration” (Kasten 174). Exhibitions of wax dummies had been popular cultural
attractions for decades at the time of Leni’s film and had already served as driving elements of
many texts (Bloom 17-19).
Wax objects in art date back at least to Ancient Greece and Egypt. In the Middle Ages,
miniature humanoids made of wax were used as talismans in black magic rituals in which “the
practitioner attempted to kill the person represented in wax by poking the statue’s ‘heart’ and
hoping the gesture would harm the person” (Bloom 3). Waxen figures and sculpture continued
in Europe through the Renaissance until Madame Tussaud made her famous waxen

51

The connection between wax figures and the Pygmalion and living statues myths is clear and will be
included in the expanded version of this chapter when I publish this dissertation as a book. Excellent work on this
topic has also already been done by Michelle Bloom in her 2003 monograph Waxworks: A Cultural Obsession.
52
In the English-language exports of the film, the censor board in London required that the name be
changed to Springheeled Jack (Kasten 176).

85
likenesses of the beheaded nobility during the French Revolution (Bloom 2-8). As Michelle
Bloom states in the introduction to her book Waxworks: A Cultural Obsession:
[The] generic wax-museum scenario raises several important issues engendered
by wax figures, which embody the blurring of boundaries characterizing
modernism and, even more so, postmodernism, namely, those between
self/other, subject/object, human being/inanimate form, living body/corpse,
life/death, male/female, solid/liquid, dynamic/static...fiction/history,
authentic/fake…interior/exterior. . . Wax, wax figures, and wax museums blur
such distinctions or, to use a term derived from the properties of wax, “dissolve”
them.53 (xi-xii)54
The dissolution of such boundaries points to the heart of Leni’s Das Wachsfigurenkabinett. The
wax figures of the frame narrative become living, breathing men in the embedded stories; the
figures, regarded as phenomenological objects by the museum’s patrons and the poet,
become active living subjects with their own subjectivities.
Many of these binary pairs intrinsic to wax, wax sculpture, and wax museums that
Bloom cites are also applicable to Husserl’s phenomenology. Building off of the subject/object
dichotomy, phenomenology and its rallying cry of “zu den Sachen selbst!” situates the thinking
subject in a perpetual relation to various sorts of objects by means of intentionality, or directed
consciousness. The self and the other are explored through Husserl’s intersubjectivity and
empathic relations, which are necessary to regard another subject not just as a physical

53
54

Further exploration of these binaries has been done by Donna Haraway in “A Cyborg Manifesto.”
While not technically made of wax, the properties Bloom describes here recall the shape shifting
character Constable Odo in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, who will receive extensive attention later in this chapter.

86
Körper, but as a fellow living psychophysical entity or Leib. Notions of the interior and exterior
refer for Husserl to the horizons that limit the subject’s perspective at any given time as to
various hidden sides of the phenomenon, both as part of its appearance and as part of the
internal structure and historical context. Husserl even goes so far as to discuss wax museums
themselves, specifically the perception of human beings and inanimate forms, as well as
authentic versus fake anthropoidal entities. This discussion of wax museums and the subject’s
intentionally directed consciousness begin in Husserl’s early work and serve to inform the
basis for his construction of phenomenology.
In the second volume of Husserl’s Logische Untersuchungen from 1901, the
philosopher undertakes the task of explaining how his theory of intentionality can be, in some
instances, contextually dependent. Intentionality, as previously discussed, refers to the
“directedness” of consciousness; that is to say, consciousness is always conscious of
something. It is vital to keep in mind here that for Husserl intentionality contains three
interrelated, but distinct parts: the intentional act denotes whether the subject is perceiving,
remembering, believing, et cetera—this corresponds to a sort of psychological attitude that the
consciousness is taking. Second, the intentional object is, simply, the phenomenon that
consciousness is directed toward—the something that consciousness is conscious of. The
third part, intentional content, refers to how a subject thinks about a phenomenon—from a
particular perspective, being a certain way, and so forth (Husserl LU II 386-391). The
contextually-dependent interpretations, or Aufforderungen, of intentionality are explored in
order to explain the possibility that “mental acts with identical intuitive or sensuous contents
can nevertheless represent different objects and properties in different contexts” (Hopp 220).
Husserl takes the example of a person walking into a waxworks museum.

87
Im Panopticum lustwandelnd begegnen wir auf der Treppe einer liebenswürdig
winkenden, fremden Dame—der bekannte Panopticumscherz. Es ist eine Puppe,
die uns einen Augenblick täuschte. So lange wir in der Täuschung befangen sind,
haben wir eine Wahrnehmung, so gut wie irgend eine andere. Wir sehen eine
Dame, nicht eine Puppe. Haben wir den Trug erkannt, so verhält es sich
umgekehrt, nun sehen wir eine Puppe (wir haben also noch immer eine
Wahrnehmung), und zwar eine Puppe, die eine Dame vorstellt. Natürlich heißt
diese Rede vom Vorstellen nicht, dass die Wahrnehmung die Vorstellung sei,
sondern dass das Wahrgenommene die praktische Function habe, die bezügliche
bloße Vorstellung zu erregen. Im Übrigen ist das Wahrgenommene (die Puppe)
hier auch verschieden von dem, was vermittelst der Wahrnehmung vorstellig
werden soll (der Dame). (Husserl LU II 414-415)
Husserl goes on to conclude that even after recognizing that the figure of the woman is
a wax doll, the subject must reconcile that the same physical phenomenon, a figure in the
shape of a woman, is at once the matter for a percept (the factual existence of the wax doll)
and a perceptual fiction (the appearance of a living woman); however, both of these
understandings cannot coexist simultaneously and independently. While for Husserl it is
impossible to unsee the figure as a doll and not a living person once it has been realized, that
is not to say that the factual percept of the waxiness of the doll is all that one sees at this point.
As the subject continues to perceive the doll, the fact of the wax construction is known, but at

88
the same time the implied humanness of the doll’s construction exists, rather, as part of the
whole phenomenon.55
Before the subject realizes the figure is made of wax and not truly human, for example
while the subject is still some distance away, the subject’s mind works to fill in missing
information about the figure. This line between the information that is given and that which is
not, which the mind must consequently fill in, is in Husserl’s terminology a horizon and
connotes everything about the figure from the current viewpoint that is not directly perceptible.
Husserl distinguishes between internal and external horizons, which in this case would
correspond to the figure’s assumed beating heart and breathing lungs as an internal horizon,
and the rear of her Körper as an external. In perceiving the wax figure as a living human, the
subject not only assumes a functioning lived body, but one with past lived experiences in her
Lebenswelt. Before the subject recognizes the figure as wax, the approach to the woman is
characterized by Husserl’s intersubjective empathy, which is based in the recognition of
similarities with the subject’s self in the perceived phenomenon.
The draw of wax museums centers around the thrill of playing with phenomenal
perception, an experience which requires the willing participation of the visitor and occurs in
the form of a Husserlian epoché, or bracketing off of existing knowledge. As wax modeling of
human forms had in the early twentieth century already existed for several hundred years,
visitors to waxworks exhibits enter with the knowledge that the figures are not, in fact, human,
although they do possess human form. In order to experience the uncanniness of the figures at
55

Freud’s essay Das Unheimliche from 1919 works with this same situation; however, as his account takes
the direction of Oedipus and a fear of castration, only the legacy of his use of the term “unheimlich” is relevant for
my argument here. The gulf between the familiar and the frightening, as dealt with by Freud, is also dealt with by
Jasia Reichardt in the form of the uncanny valley. The work of both theorists will be applicable in the monograph
version of this document.

89
all, the visitor must bracket the knowledge of the figures’ construction in order to perceive them
anew as phenomena. The epoché is a key aspect to Husserl’s phenomenology, allowing the
subject to experience the phenomenon as itself without interference from previous experiences
or knowledge (Husserl Ideen I 56-57).
Right from the very beginning of Leni’s film, the ability of the Panopticum at the
travelling fair to work with its patrons in the practice of the epoché is called into question. While
it is the task of the patron to bracket previous knowledge in order to perceive the phenomena
of the wax figures anew, the setting of the museum must work alongside the patrons by
creating the correct atmosphere and by displaying believable wax specimens. Through the
want-ad for a person to create stories surrounding the wax figures, as well as the purveyor
attempting to mend Harun al-Rashid’s broken arm, the audience is made aware that this
waxworks museum is no longer as successful as it once was—namely because its patrons are
no longer able to see the figures as anything other than wax dummies. The disrepair of the
figures and the overly simple presentation of the historical personalities out of context works
against the patrons as they attempt to bracket the knowledge that they are viewing wax figures
in order to enjoy the exhibit. The implication, then, is that this dearth of patrons has been going
on for some time and the hired poet’s stories will add a new element to the museum’s display,
thus allowing for a more easily achieved epoché and richer phenomenological experience
once it is achieved.
In writing the stories surrounding Harun al-Rashid, Ivan the Terrible, and Jack the
Ripper,56 the unnamed poet engages in two different levels of phenomenological experience,

56

This last tale is admittedly more of a hallucinatory dream than a composition, but functions the same as
the others in this interpretation.

90
which correspond to the frame narrative and collection of inner narratives respectively. In the
frame narrative, the poet directs his consciousness toward each wax doll. He analyzes the
given phenomenon before him, including for example the missing arm of Harun al-Rashid, and
makes extrapolations as to the existence of features beyond the external horizons of each
figure. His task, however, is to create stories for each figure, and in doing so, he explores the
existence of phenomena beyond the internal horizons, that is to say, personal tales of each
figure’s history. In order to pen believable tales, the poet must engage intersubjectively with
the figures, both as purely physical Körper—explaining, for example why Harun al-Rashid is
missing an arm—as well as lived Leiber. By placing himself in the shoes of each figure to write
the stories, the poet engages in a form of intersubjective empathy with each one, which will
allow him to imagine the Lebenswelt and lived experiences of each person and take them into
account when creating the stories. Through all of these actions, the poet helps to create a
more believable Lebenswelt within the waxworks exhibit itself, thereby encouraging the epoché
on the part of future visitors, which will allow them to enter the Lebenswelt of the wax museum
and experience the wax figures as potentially living beings.
By attempting to create believable stories to accompany the wax figures, the poet is
also engaging intersubjectively and empathically with the future visitors to the museum, as
represented by the museum owner’s daughter who stands behind the poet and reads
enthusiastically as he composes his works. While the owner’s daughter is obviously not a
visitor herself, her role in the writing process involves reading the text that is being written and
allowing herself to be swept along with the narrative. Since she, as one who is not seeking the
epochetic experience of the wax museum and one who is used to seeing the figures as just
wax, is able to enter the Lebenswelt the poet creates, his work is guaranteed success among

91
the future visitors to the museum. It is this empathic position toward future visitors that
constitutes the second level of phenomenological experience on the part of the poet.
Husserl’s conception of empathy is central to the poet’s ability to write believable and
engaging stories for the wax figures. Husserl explains intersubjective empathy thus:
Die von Anderen gesetzten Dinge sind auch die meinen: in der Einfühlung mache
ich die Setzung des Anderen mit, ich identifiziere etwa das Ding, das ich mir
gegenüber habe in der Erscheinungsweise >> mit dem vom Anderen in der
Erscheinungsweise << gesetzten Ding. Dazu gehört die Möglichkeit des
Austausches durch Platzwechsel, jeder Mensch had an derselben Raumstelle
vom selben Dinge ,,dieselben” Erscheinungen — wen alle, wie wir annehmen
können, die gleiche Sinnlichkeit haben — und daher objectiviert sich auch der
,,Anblick” eines Dinges; jeder hat von derselben Raumstelle bei derselben
Beleuchtung denselben Anblick, z.B. einer Landschaft (Ideen II 168-9)
Through the poet’s phenomenological perception of the figures he anticipates how the visitors
will view the wax figures and then pens his works such as to accentuate aspects of the
physical figure itself (in the case of Harun al-Rashid) as well as the historical mythos of each
individual. In addition to placing himself in the shoes of the wax museum’s visitors, the poet
also exhibits Husserl’s related conception of intersubjectivity.
Whereas for Fichte intersubjectivity occurred through the Auffordern and direct personal
interactions between subjects, for Husserl the focus shifts to the shared experiences of
phenomena. The empathic relation (Einfühlung) to another subject functions as a modification
of intentionality, that is to say that another conscious subject is recognized in a body similar to

92
one’s own acting in ways similar to how the observer would act. While this aspect of Husserl’s
intersubjectivity is not far removed from Fichte’s, it is Husserl’s focus on how these various
subjects interact with the phenomenal world that marks the real distinction between his thought
and Fichte’s. Once the existence of other consciousnesses is secured through empathy, the
subject realizes that there is for each other subject a different, alien perspective from one’s
own that the subject cannot have. This realization brings with it also the idea that one’s own
conception of the world is but one of many possible perspectives on a common, objective
external world. It is this shared experience of the objective, external world that serves as the
building blocks for the Lebenswelt. (Husserl, CM 158)
By entering the physical structure of the wax museum and practicing the Husserlian
epoché, the visitors are entering a different Lebenswelt. A Lebenswelt for Husserl is not just a
spatiotemporal plane upon which consciousnesses can exist, rather a Lebenswelt includes the
totality of experiences and phenomena that the ego perceives, as well as the reasonable
expectations that one can have about future experiences and phenomena within the given
context (Ideen I 89-90). Through the combination of the physical separation from the external
world offered by the entering room of the Panopticum, the willing epoché on the part of the
viewers, the wax figures themselves—and crucially to the film’s plot—the stories invented by
the poet, Leni creates a new Lebenswelt within the Panopticum separate from both the
external reality of the fair, and most importantly, the previous situation within the wax museum
as it failed to attract visitors and fell into disrepair. On the surface, the addition of the poet’s
stories simply breathes life into an otherwise stale wax exhibit; however, taken in the context of
Husserl’s phenomenology, the poet creates a new Lebenswelt within the museum as his
writings provide new perceivable phenomena, and after the visitor’s epochetic suspension of

93
the outside reality, rewrite the expectations of phenomenological experience within the
Panopticum.
The Lebenswelt created by the poet for the visitors to the museum functions as a
double of the filmic Lebenswelt created by Leni in Das Wachsfigurenkabinett for the viewers of
the film in the theater. Both the poet and Leni rework the expectations of reality, and with the
help of the viewers’ epoché, the phenomenal figures of wax become living individuals with
histories of their own. As the poet’s stories are works of fiction, the phenomenologically “living”
wax figures serve as the most fundamental component of shaping the viewers’ expectations
within this Lebenswelt; the fictional backstories not only bring the wax figures to life by telling of
the figures’ past actions as living people, but also reinforce the idea that the lifelike dolls could
again at any time start acting of their own volition. In contrast with the Fichtean analyses of Der
Sandmann and Frankenstein, the phenomenological focus within Das Wachsfigurenkabinett
lies not on how subjectivities are constructed, rather it is on how an already established
perceiving subject engages with other individuals, or their analogs, as physical phenomena in
the world (Körper) and as potentially lived bodies (Leiber) within their own phenomenological
contexts (Lebenswelten).
Metropolis (1927)
Like Der Sandmann and Frankenstein, much ink has been spilled by critics and
scholars in the analysis of Fritz Lang’s Metropolis. Thomas Elsaesser reported that “hardly an
article in the papers that year [1927] did not make reference to it, including a fair number of
cartoons and parodies” (22), Lotte Eisner was impressed by the “beauty of the light and
shapes” in the film (223), and Siegfried Kracauer saw within the work the rumblings of nascent

94
Nazism (163). While the content and plot can be considered problematic, the film’s lasting
legacy solidifies the cultural importance of Lang’s spectacle.
Reflections of phenomenology in Metropolis are evident in the societal and physical
structures that divide the citizens in the upper and lower cities, intersubjective relations, and
especially in the creation and unleashing of Futura in the guise of Maria. In an effort to avoid
awkward constructions and circumvent the confusion of the dual roles played by Brigitte Helm,
I will use the novel’s name for the Maschinenmensch, Futura, regardless of which face is
visible and Maria for the human whose form Futura takes on. This perspective also reinforces
the phenomenological elements of Futura’s creation and acquisition of her human form in that
the consciousness that Rotwang created for her, as well as the Leib she experiences the world
through, both remain the same; it is the image of her that changes. I will return to the creation
of Futura in more detail in the coming pages.
The physical structure of Joh Fredersen’s Metropolis is a city built vertically and divided
at ground level into Metropolis proper existing above ground, and the workers’ city, or “the
depths” as it is called in the film, existing below, and the catacombs down further still. While
the catacombs are supposed to be sealed off from the workers, Maria has been holding
religious services there to inspire hope among the workers that a mediator will come and their
situation will improve. Counting the catacombs as a subset of the depths, these two cities
function as two opposing Lebenswelten for the city’s residents. While this lumping together of
the catacombs and depths on one hand glosses over the distinct attitudes associated with
each—the depths with endless and dehumanizing work, and the catacombs with peace and
hope—my distinction here functions on the level of each area’s populace and access to the
physical spaces. Moreover, in order to get to a place of hopefulness for a new future in the

95
catacombs, the workers attending Maria’s services must bring with them their experiences in
the depths.
As previously discussed, a Lebenswelt is made up of the totality of experiences and
phenomena that the ego perceives and the reasonable expectations that one can have about
future experiences and phenomena (Ideen I 89-90). In the upper city, Freder’s experiences
include the huge and expansive city, the affluence inherent in being Joh Fredersen’s son, and
the decadence within both the Club der Söhne and Yoshiwara. However, Maria’s entrance into
the Club der Söhne breaks the continuity of his reality. His Lebenswelt was literally broken off
from that of Maria and the workers by the distance between them.57 The distance between the
two Lebenswelten represents a literal instantiation of a Husserlian horizon, the break between
what is perceived by consciousness and what is co-given, that is to say part of the
phenomenon’s whole, but not immediately perceivable (Ideen I 80). The sons in the club, and
Freder in particular, know that the city is kept running by a lower section driven by workers;
however, while its existence is known, it is not directly perceived and therefore not part of the
Lebenswelt of those above. The Lebenswelt of the workers’ city, conversely, consists of
fourteen hours of grueling work per calendar day,58 no access to sunshine, moving in herds to
and from shifts, and identities replaced with numbers.
The main conflict of the film begins when Maria transgresses this horizon by bringing
children up from the depths to see and be seen by those in the Club der Söhne. Her act not

57

Although it would seem that an elevator linking the Club der Söhne directly with the workers’ city is an
invitation to break through this separation.
58
Work is built around the ten-hour clock, which measures the length of the work shift as well as the offhours. Above this clock on the wall is a separate twenty-four-hour clock to mark the passage of calendar days. In
one twenty-four-hour cycle, workers will work one ten-hour shift, rest for ten hours, and then go back to work for
four more hours before the calendar day changes.

96
only breaches the horizons that separate the two words, it is also indicative of a call to those in
the Club der Söhne to experience empathy and acknowledge the intersubjectivity between
them and the impoverished children in front of them, as well as the workers below. Before
descending to the depths himself, and upon seeing Maria, Freder clutches at his heart. This
could be interpreted as Freder falling in love at first sight; however, the expression on Freder’s
face is less one of awe and captivation; rather, it is an expression of deep sadness, shame,
and empathy for the poor, raggedly dressed and dirty children Maria has brought up with her.
This gesture appears several more times through the course of the film by both Freder and
Maria when they are feeling deep empathy for their fellow subjects. Freder’s initial encounter
with Maria definitely leaves a profound impression on him, and he soon descends to the
workers’ city. After witnessing the horror of the machine explosion, and unsuccessfully
pleading with his father, Freder returns to the depths and asks to trade lives with one of the
workers. This “stepping into the shoes of the other” demonstrates a literal instantiation of
Husserl’s metaphorical conception of the Platzwechsel of intersubjective empathy. He writes:
Die von Anderen gesetzten Dinge sind auch die meinen: in der Einfühlung mache
ich die Setzung des Anderen mit, ich identifiziere etwa das Ding, das ich mir
gegenüber habe in der Erscheinungsweise 𝛼 mit dem vom Anderen in der
Erscheinungsweise 𝛼 gesetzten Ding. Dazu gehört die Möglichkeit des
Austausches durch Platzwechsel… (Ideen II 168)
The figurative Platzwechsel of empathy experienced by both Freder and Maria is
redoubled by the literalization of Husserl’s term in Rotwang’s apprehension of Maria and
transference of Maria’s image onto the robot Futura. In Rotwang’s attempt to capture Maria, he
chases her through the catacombs with a spotlight, a symbol of where his consciousness is

97
directed and continuing the symbology of eyes and sight from romanticism. For Husserl’s
phenomenology, consciousness is always conscious of something and it is this directedness
toward an object that constitutes intentionality. The nature of his light allows him to focus on
Maria, while ignoring the features of the catacombs around her. As she is illuminated with her
back against a wall, the spotlight allows Rotwang and the viewer to focus on her features,
clothes, expression of fear, and her body language. Literalizing Wieland’s Enlightenment,
Rotwang can see clearly and discern his target from the surrounding rock; however, the
addition of phenomenology invites one to analyze her appearance and her experience closely
as presented phenomena, while at the same time the viewer is pulled into intersubjective
empathy with the character.
Rotwang’s intentionality toward Maria does not, however, represent a complete
demonstration of the phenomenological process. His spotlight search, rather, renders into
metaphor the intentionality that will be exacted more completely by the machinery in his
laboratory. Filled with equipment for work with both chemistry and electricity, Rotwang’s
laboratory centers around an enclosed bed that is attached by wires to the chair that Futura
sits in against a wall. After a cut, Maria is already lying on the bed with electrodes attached to
her head and to metal strips that run parallel to each other around her body, functioning as a
sort of Faraday cage. She is not unconscious, as indicated by her head movements and
strained expression, but her eyes remain closed as Rotwang proceeds with his work. With
eyes closed, she is no longer supposed to be seen intersubjectively: she is now reduced to
worldly phenomenal object for the perception of the machine subjectivity operated by Rotwang.
The machine, then, functions as an extension of Rotwang’s own eyes as it surrounds Maria
with electricity from the Tesla coil above her.

98
The machine approaches Maria without any need of epoché and without the hinderance
of external horizons that are inherent in perceiving a phenomenon from one perspective. The
machine is able to scan her entire body from all angles at once—an ideal ability when
perceiving any phenomenon within Husserl’s philosophy but never capable by human egos.
The machine also breaks the internal horizon as indicated by the pulsating heart that becomes
visible in Futura’s sleek, metal body before the image of Maria is transplanted onto it. The
electrodes on Maria’s head and her expression of exhaustion after the procedure indicate a
further breach of the internal horizon as at least some of her knowledge and memories of past
experiences is transferred along with the image of her body.
While the machine scans Maria’s body and mind, it is not her full lived body (Leib) that
is transferred to Futura, it is rather a copy of her physical body (Körper) with elements of her
consciousness added as contextual necessity to fool the workers during her sermons.
Husserl’s conception of the Leib is of a unified, psychophysical, conscious perceiver of
phenomena. Within the Leib, there is no distinction between the spatio-temporal body and the
consciousness as existing outside of space and time as argued by Descartes. Rather, the
physical organs of the Leib and the functioning of the brain are all part of a single perceptual
ego-experience. The Körper, on the other hand, is primarily a spatio-temporal entity; it is what
can be measured physically—and in this case replicated by the machine.
By the time of Husserl’s writing and the release of Lang’s film, neural scientists were
well underway in understanding the physical structure and functioning of the nervous system in
animals. In 1906, during the early years of Husserl’s writing, Santiago Ramón y Cajal and
Camillo Golgi jointly won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for their contributions to
the discovery of the physical neural networks of the brain (Fishman 690). Given this scientific

99
context in the early twentieth century, Rotwang’s machine demonstrates the capability of
scanning the neural structures of Maria’s physical brain, as evidenced by Futura’s immediate
knowledge of how to present herself to and manipulate the workers into revolting, while leaving
Maria’s lived experience, that is to say her unified consciousness-body, intact. This distinction
in the machine’s function is supported by the fact that Maria is soon disengaged from the
machine and able to function normally, while Futura’s lived experience in Maria’s form is
drastically different from anything Maria would engage in. Moreover, at the end of the film as
Futura is burned at the stake, the image of Maria vanishes and it is her metallic robot body that
is left to burn.
The transference of Körper from Maria to Futura presents an interestingly advanced
take on conceptions of both physical body and consciousness. Rotwang’s machine is able to
scan Maria’s form and transmit it as data via electricity to be reconstructed upon Futura. This
construction of the body as reducible to data, transferable, and re-creatable presents a stark
divergence from the Cartesian view that minds are separate from the bodies that house them.
Other works of the time including Der Golem and R.U.R. (both 1920) represent modernist
takes on the conception of consciousness as separable from the body and anticipate later
variations on the idea, which, with varying degrees of adherence to Cartesianism, have
become popular tropes within science fiction; however, the transference sequence of
Metropolis presents a different situation entirely. The transference between Maria and Futura
not only avoids Cartesianism, it also does not fit other tropes of science fiction such as cloning
since Futura retains her metallic body, nor does it adhere to the definitions of possession or
identity exchange. Futura’s creation comes closest to aligning itself with a variation on the

100
tropes of the evil twin and body double, since Futura is acting as an anti-Maria while bearing
her image.
Perhaps, though, the other work that most similarly engages with the body doubling
motif in Metropolis is the programmable matter in two episodes of Doctor Who from 2011: “The
Rebel Flesh” and “The Almost People.”59 In these episodes, workers in a dangerous facility
have their bodies scanned to produce doubles of themselves out of a living liquid 60 called the
Flesh. These doubles, unlike Futura’s anti-Maria figure, fully replicate the Leib of the individual,
which takes the motif from Metropolis one step further. In the episodes, a solar storm affects
the Flesh doubles further making them not just copies, but independently sentient with
independent volition. Rather than just the Körper being reducible to information as in Lang’s
film, in Doctor Who the entirety of the individual including all of their consciousness is
quantifiable and reproducible, creating a double Leib.
The ethical conflict of the episode lies in the question of whether the Flesh doubles are
sentient and deserving of equal rights to life as the original people. This conflict is decidedly
posthumanist, however its construction and resolution reflect the moral of Metropolis that the
mediator of between the head and the hands must be the heart. While the execution of this
idea in the film is clunky at best and in the end simply doesn’t work out well for the workers, the
metaphorical reimagining in Doctor Who functions much more smoothly. In Metropolis, the
workers (the hands) are oppressed by the boss of the city, Joh Fredersen (the head). To stave
off a workers’ revolt, Maria preaches to the workers that a mediator will arise, and indeed
59

The Flesh also appears later in “A Good Man Goes to War,” however the focus of the episode is
fundamentally different.
60
The living liquid also builds upon the wax figures of Leni’s film in that through the creation of each copy,
the figure appears to be made of a waxy latex substance capable of forming into any shape. Additionally, the
ability to change state from liquid to solid by The Flesh mimics wax.

101
Freder comes to fill that role through his empathy for his father and for the workers. In Doctor
Who, however, the human workers function in place of Joh Fredersen and the citizens of
Metropolis’ upper city. They have the knowledge to do the jobs, but allocate the dangerous
completion of the actual work to their Flesh-based “Gangers,” short for Doppelgänger. Once
the radiation from the solar storm hits the planet, the Gangers become sentient beings
independent from their human originals. The conflict between the Gangers and the humans
reaches the point that the Gangers kill one human and take the rest hostage. The Doctor, who
now also has a Ganger double, works together with his Ganger to prove that the two races are
not different and both should have all the respect afforded to any sentient being. The Doctor
then facilitates the resolution that the Ganger of the human who was killed in the struggle
between the groups, Jimmy, assumes the role of Jimmy in the world as father to Adam, his
son. The Doctor not only mediates between the humans and the Gangers by having empathy
with both, he does so much more effectively than Freder in Metropolis.
The reducibility of corporeal form to transferable data in Metropolis anticipates, and in
Doctor Who recalls, William Gibson’s oft-used turn of phrase from one quintessential
cyberpunk text, Neuromancer: “data made flesh” (16). The way in which Fritz Lang’s film
constructs the new image of Futura not only reflects many concepts central to Husserl’s
phenomenology, it also anticipates Scott Bukatman’s characterization of the Information Age.
The creation of Futura stretches the boundaries of its historical context of the late Industrial
Age to anticipate the quantifiability and transference of the Information Age, as well as the
concept of mutual realizability in the functionalist philosophy of the early posthumanist period.

102

Posthumanism
The progression of epistemological models of philosophy develops further within
posthumanism and, in a manner of thinking, marks a dialectical resolution of the long-standing
subject-object dichotomy within this epistemological progression. Fichte’s Identitätsphilosophie
focuses on the Ich as a positing of the self—an absolute activity that results in the selfconsciousness of the subject. Because Fichte’s focus is without question the subject as self,
the existence of the external world and the resolution between their mutual existences are built
directly out of the subject’s own self-positing consciousness. Fichte’s creation of the self, notself (external world, etc), and their mutually assured coexistence and interaction through his
three principles represents in itself a dialectical model, and one which serves as a mirror for
the larger Fichte-Husserl-Bukatman/Moravec argument that I am making.
While Fichte’s philosophy focuses on the self-positing consciousness as its base,
Husserl’s phenomenology shifts the attention away from how the subject begins existing as a
self-conscious entity on to how the subject perceives objects (phenomena) in the Lebenswelt.
Phenomenology and Fichte's Wissenschaftslehre both take Kant's transcendental idealism, for
better or worse, as their inspirations; however, it is Husserl's phenomenology that builds further
upon the idea of transcendentalism regarding the nature of phenomena, i.e. external objects.
While the subjective perception of phenomena sits at the heart of Husserl's philosophy,
Husserl also maintains that perceivable phenomena are themselves transcendental; that is to
say that the phenomena extend beyond any single subject's perception. Perception, for
Husserl, always takes place from a particular point of view and through the sense and mental
faculties that humans possess. This Leib, in Husserl's words, is a "lived body" that rejects the

103
Cartesian notion of a substantial physical form and an insubstantial mind, rather holding that
the way that consciousness is able to perceive the phenomenal world is strictly contingent
upon the body's particular modes of interaction with phenomena. In very simple terms, then,
Fichte's goal is to ground the existence of the subject within its own self-consciousness, which
forms the thesis of this dialectic. Husserl shifts the focus away from Fichte's self-positing
subject onto the subjective perception of transcendental phenomena, which constitute the
antithesis. These divergent focuses on subjects themselves and subjects' perceptions of
objects are reconciled through the posthumanist approach (synthesis) of rethinking the
necessary conditions of what constitutes a self-conscious entity, the external limitations that
distinguish conscious from non-conscious entities, and the varying natures of possible
Lebenswelten.
Husserl's writing on the embodied subjectivity of the Leib does not mandate that
consciousness always necessarily be tied to a human body as does the work of his student
Martin Heidegger. Rethinking Descartes’ problematic duality between the substantive body
and the insubstantial mind, Husserl understands the conscious body in two ways: physical
body as Körper and lived, conscious body as Leib. This insight allows the phenomenologist to
see humans in two different ways simultaneously, as physical thing and as part of a
perspectivally-oriented consciousness, which are mutually dependent sides of the conscious
entity. The crucial distinction with Husserl, and in the epistemology camp generally, is that
while the interaction that any consciousness may have with the outside world is determined by
the lived perspective,61 these thinkers do not mandate that the only possible perspective be

61

Maurice Merleau-Ponty, a phenomenologist following Husserl, did fantastic work regarding the nature of
embodiment and lived perspective. While his work is crucial to a full understanding of the connections between

104
housed within a human body. While I am not arguing that epistemological philosophy has been
consciously directing itself toward the possibility of mind uploading and downloading since
German Idealism, both Fichte and Husserl had the opportunity to tie their epistemologies
exclusively to human bodies (as Heidegger did in his fundamental ontology) but chose to
ground them instead within mental activities.
This choice to exclude flesh and blood bodies as the only possible vessel for human
consciousness, in conjunction with Husserl’s conception of kinesthetic consciousness, serve to
provide posthumanist theorists decades later with a platform on which to build their theories.
Kinesthetic consciousness focuses on the Leib’s potential for motility within the Lebenswelt;
that is to say that one defining characteristic of the body for Husserl is that it can change the
spatiotemporal perspective it takes when perceiving phenomena (Ideen II §36-37). A
posthumanism faithful to Husserlian phenomenology, then, would exclude the possibility for
conscious existence within an immovable vessel with limited means of perceiving the
phenomenal world. From this perspective, Moravec’s hypothesis in Mind Children about
downloading consciousnesses from a collective into varying types of corporeal bodies might be
even more faithful to the aims of Husserl’s phenomenology than existence within a flesh and
blood body is.
The essence of epistemological posthumanism reveals itself through its fluidity of
possible forms; that is to say that it is the nature of epistemological posthumanism not to limit
itself to any one particular notion of embodiment, rather it requires a self-conscious, selfpositing, perspectival subject. As Joona Taipale argues in Phenomenology and Embodiment:

phenomenology and posthumanism, particularly cybernetics, the focus of this chapter on the beginnings of each
movement restrict me from delving further into his fascinating work.

105
Husserl and the Constitution of Subjectivity, “In the dawn of the modern era, philosophy was
reinterpreted as the study of consciousness, and along with this move the body was cast into
the side of the object, and hence pushed into the margins of philosophy” (Taipale 1). While
Husserl’s phenomenology brings the body back into epistemological philosophy as one
example of a necessary point of perspective, epistemological posthumanism takes it one step
further and begins experimenting with various constructions and forms of body. Ihab Hassan
concludes that the most appropriate icon for his vision of posthumanism (a unification of the
epistemological and ontological tracks and a resolution of their arguments) is Prometheus;
however, as this unification is yet to be realized, I argue that it is more accurate to see the
epistemology camp as rallying behind the essence of Descartes’ wax argument, especially as
it is embodied in the character of Odo in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (DS9).
In the decades since Hassan’s paper, epistemological arguments have not only
embraced the new technological possibilities inherent in the contemporary world, they have
also doubled down on their epistemological standpoints. Figures such as the shapeshifting
“Changling” Odo have complicated the role of shapeshifting in narratives as aligning itself with
misdeeds and untrustworthiness as it was in Zeus’ many transformations in Greek mythology,
werewolves, vampires, and other beings. Odo is the chief of security on the space station and
as such views his surroundings with an inherent (Cartesian) doubt in the validity of the things
he sees. As I believe Odo to embody the essence of epistemological posthumanism, I will
examine him more closely later in this chapter.
In addition to DS9’s Odo, several other figures in the posthumanist era recall elements
of Cartesian thought, and with it the epistemological bent that Scott Bukatman argues serves
as the defining feature of science fiction since the 1960s (17). Harrison Ford’s character

106
Deckard62 in Ridley Scott’s Blade Runner, an adaptation of Philip K. Dick’s Do Androids Dream
of Electric Sheep, is tasked with determining whether the being before him is a human or a
replicant, an android created for dangerous and difficult work.63 Continuing the ocular motif
present in German idealism, romanticism, and phenomenology, it is only by means of the
Voight-Kampff machine measuring empathy and other emotions as reflected in the subject’s
eyes that Deckard is able to determine whether he is interviewing a human or a replicant.
Further, works such as The Matrix Trilogy (1999-2003), the Star Trek franchise (1966-present),
Transcendence (2014), Neuromancer (1984), Tron (1982), The Mass Effect Trilogy (20072012), and countless others explore variations on Descartes’ conception of the separation
between extended body and insubstantial mind. While many works beyond those listed above
grapple with epistemological themes in posthumanism, Star Trek and The Mass Effect Trilogy
serve as particularly rich examples of how epistemological posthumanism explores the nature
of consciousness in imagined galaxies of technological enhancement, sentient machines and
holograms, and virtual spaces.
Star Trek
The galaxy of Star Trek,64 originally dreamed by by Gene Roddenberry, has been a part
of popular culture and the science fiction canon since it originally aired in 1966. While The
Original Series (TOS) only ran for three seasons, its popularity skyrocketed while in

62

While this nod to Descartes is barely concealed, Blade Runner offers a complex look at Cartesian doubt
in the posthumanist era.
63
By characterizing the replicants as merely a workforce, Dick and Scott are mixing elements of Cartesian
philosophy with Golem legends. This line of questioning will come up again in my discussion of the geth and
quarians in The Mass Effect Trilogy.
64
For the sake of brevity, I will refer to the Star Trek franchise generally as Star Trek while abbreviating
The Original Series to TOS, The Next Generation to TNG, and referring to the films by their number rather than
their full titles.

107
syndication65 and the numerous subsequent series and films continue to demonstrate the
cultural significance of Roddenberry’s idea. Star Trek expands upon Fredric Jameson’s wellknown claim that science fiction is written about the contemporary world rather than a far away
time and space by creating many of the various alien races as a collection of fractured human
personality traits. The Vulcans are rational and logical, the Betazoids are empathic, the
Romulans are political and cunning, the Klingons are proud, idealistic, and religious, 66 the
Hirogen are sporting but ruthless hunters, and the Ferengi are comically capitalist— and this is
only a small sample of the vast number of races in the Star Trek universe.
It would be an oversimplification to argue that these races exist only as incarnations of
these various character traits—they do not—rather these traits serve as the driving elements of
each race’s existence or culture. Thus Star Trek, and much of contemporary science fiction
and posthumanism, is not “predicated on the transformative encounter of the ontological
Other” that Elana Gomel67 cites as the starting point for developing her posthumanist ethics
(3); rather, Star Trek embodies a version of the very problem Gomel is trying to avoid. Building
upon Neil Badmington, Gomel writes “‘Humanism is always becoming posthumanism
(Badmington 12). But the converse is also true: posthumanism is always sliding back into
humanism. To avoid this slide, I will argue, posthumanism requires a new form of ethics…” (3).

65

Within weeks of Star Trek’s debut in the United States, Raumpatrouille Orion, a strikingly similar series
about space exploration, debuted in Germany. Ultimately only seven episodes of Orion were made and Star Trek
(Raumschiff Enterprise) gained a massive following in Germany that still exists to this day (startrek.de).
66
The Klingons in TOS represented some of these traits, but were much more richly developed in the
subsequent films and television series.
67
Gomel’s project favors literary science fiction while evoking a dismissive, overly simplified, and polemical
attitude toward visual media and the Star Trek franchise.

108
While the ethics of Starfleet are thoroughly—and at times simplistically—humanist, Star Trek
explores the human of the here and now with exaggerated reflections of itself as adversaries. 68
This is heavy incorporation of humanistic values and the positing of embodied versions
of humanity’s own undesirable traits as adversaries appears strongly in the pilot episode of
Star Trek: The Next Generation (TNG), “Encounter at Farpoint.” While on the way to negotiate
use of Farpoint Station for Starfleet, the Enterprise and its new crew, headed by Jean-Luc
Picard (Patrick Stewart), is trapped and detained by an immortal being called Q. Ordinarily
existing outside of normal spacetime, Q is able to assume any form, move at any speed, and
interact with the Enterprise and its crew however he likes. Q, in essence, is a god; however, he
proves himself to be not a wise god of mercy and love, but rather a childish, vengeful, and
manipulative god.69 Q accuses Picard, and all humans, of being a savage race and cites
numerous examples from Earth’s history as proof. When Picard objects that humanity has
come a long way since then—arguing that humanity has finally achieved the values of the
Enlightenment—Q changes reality so that they are no longer on the Enterprise’s bridge, rather
they are in a post-nuclear war court presided over by Q himself. Q puts humanity on trial for
being a savage race and it is Picard’s job to prove that humanity has indeed achieved
Enlightenment. Picard is not alone in the court, however. Just as in The Original Series (TOS),
Captain Kirk was always flanked by the Vulcan Spock (standing for reason and logic) and
Doctor “Bones” McCoy (standing for emotion), in Q’s court Picard (the wise diplomat captain)
is flanked by the android Data (reason, logic, facts), Counselor Deanna Troi (a Betazoid and
empath standing for emotionality, compassion, and cooperation), and Security Chief Tasha
68

I am wary here of using the term “enemies” to describe Star Trek antagonists as the goal of Starfleet is
not conquest and victory, but cooperation and understanding.
69
This description of Q recalls an episode of Star Trek: The Original Series in which Kirk’s Enterprise
meets the Greek god Apollo. (“Who Mourns for Adonais?”)

109
Yar (representing the defensive that Q has put humanity on). Picard argues for a chance to
prove humanity’s values and by the end of the episode does so by rescuing a being that looks
like, for want of a better term, a space jellyfish that is being held captive. The jellyfish, like Q, is
not beholden to one form and is being forced to hold the form of Farpoint Station itself. By
acting selflessly and regarding the space jellyfish’s right to life and respectful treatment as of
higher importance than what Starfleet would gain by using the station, Picard is successful in
his argument for humanity’s enlightenment.
The seemingly mutually exclusive claims of Badmington and Gomel about the
transformations of humanism into posthumanism and the “degradation” of posthumanism back
into humanism recall the mutual striving and limiting of the Ich and Nicht-Ich that Fichte
describes in his first two principles in the Wissenschaftslehre. The resolution of this conflict for
Fichte is the third principle guaranteeing and necessitating the coexistence and mutual
dependence of the first two, and it is exactly at this juncture of the limitations of humanism with
the new possibilities afforded to consciousness by highly advanced technology that Star Trek
forms and explores its epistemological galaxy. As proven by Captain Picard in TNG’s pilot, it is
also through taking full responsibility for past failures that he, and Starfleet at large, have been
able to achieve the goals that humanity set out for itself half a millennium before.70
As one of the critiques of the Enlightenment, or even grounds for its failure, is the
inequalities and inhumanity that have existed since the ideals were expressed. Whether they
take as example wars, genocides, sexism, racism, or any other form of violence, humanity in
the age of Starfleet has allegedly overcome them; however, one recurring ethical dilemma in

70

The stardate for this mission is listed as 41153.7, which corresponds to the year 2364.

110
Star Trek is the question of personhood and sentience.71 By interacting with numerous alien
species, the position of Starfleet is usually clear: personhood is based on being an “intelligent,
self-aware conscious entity deserving of rights, respect, and freedom” (TNG “The Offspring”)
and while this conforms to the preservation of humanist values, Star Trek expands the notion
of personhood beyond the traditional conception of the human: a single consciousness housed
within a single body. Rights, respect, and freedom have even been extended to non-person
animals at this point in the future, explained by Commander William Riker in TNG “Lonely
Among Us,” “We no longer enslave animals for food purposes.” The question of personhood is
continued through the androids and their own quests for humanness in TNG: Data (especially
in TNG “The Measure of a Man”, Lal (Data’s “daughter” in “The Offspring”), Lore (Data’s
“brother” and antagonist in TNG “Datalore” and others), the nanites created by Wesley Crusher
in TNG “Evolution,” the Great Crystalline Entity in TNG “Silicon Avatar” and others, the creation
of the self-aware hologram of Professor Moriarty in TNG “Elementary, Dear Data,” the Borg
character Seven of Nine and the self-aware holographic Doctor in Voyager. Further examples
exist in TOS, DS9, and Enterprise as well as with V’Ger, a living space probe in Star Trek I.
The characters of Data and the Borg also bring the eyes-sight motif into Star Trek.
Data’s eyes are yellow, which match the complexion of his skin, but while they draw the
viewer’s attention through their color, they only endow Data with the ability to judge distance
with incredible accuracy. Data’s eyes, then, signify his goal of becoming human, since either
his creator, Dr. Noonian Soong, or Starfleet Medical could have given him eyes capable of
perceiving well beyond the range of normal humans. The chief engineer aboard the Enterprise
in TNG is Geordi La Forge (LeVar Burton), who was born blind but is equipped with a VISOR
71

As the definitions of “sentient” and “sapient” are somewhat interchangeable throughout different series of
Trek, I will stick with the more contemporary terms “person” and “personhood.”

111
(Visual Instrument and Sensory Organ Replacement) that does give him superhuman sight by
means of a link between the external technology and his brain. Geordi is able to see in spectra
that other humans and Data cannot, which not only serves him well on away missions, but also
metaphorically represents his enlightened, cooperative leadership style (TNG: “Hollow
Pursuits). The Borg also feature cybernetic eyepieces, however theirs do not correct for being
born blind like Geordi’s, rather theirs are standard equipment for assimilated drones. While
Borg drones are given superhuman perception through their eyepieces, when Seven of Nine
(Jeri Ryan) is liberated from the hive and taken aboard Voyager, the holographic doctor
designs and fits her with an artificial human eye. Like Data in TNG, Seven of Nine in Voyager
spends the majority of her free time contemplating the meaning of being human, for which her
prosthetic eye with its “limited” range of vision is symbolic (Voyager: “The Gift”). Both Seven
and Data are able to interface directly with technology, giving them perceptual fields beyond
the limited ocular range of their “human” bodies, while at the same time expanding the way
they are able to exist as conscious entities.
While most races exist as single consciousnesses within single bodies and are basically
humanoid in shape, the Borg function as a hive mind,72 the Trill (often, but not always) are
comprised of a humanoid host with a much smaller, longer lived symbiont inside them giving
each host the memories and experiences of each previous host,73 and the Changelings exist
naturally as a liquid in The Great Link, but can take on any shape they choose. The Trill are a
Federation species;74 however, the Borg and Changelings serve as antagonists in TNG, DS9,

72
73

I will discuss the Borg and hive minds in general in chapter four.
Both the Borg and the Trill exist as hybrids, which is explored further in Star Trek: The Human Frontier by
Michèle and Duncan Barrett.
74
The United Federation of Planets is the organization under which Starfleet operates and is the main
focus of Star Trek. These planets include Earth, Vulcan, Trill, Betazed, Andoria and many others. The Federation

112
and Voyager save for individual representatives of each race (Seven of Nine and Odo in
particular) who in turn are used to explore these various forms of consciousness and
personhood. It is these explorations of consciousness and their consequent expansion of
humanist thinking that define Star Trek as a franchise situated squarely within epistemological
posthumanism; however, it is the character Odo who best embodies the beliefs of this side of
posthumanism.
The character of Odo is developed slowly, with the revelation of his backstory and rare
displays of his personality suggesting a lonesome, insecure figure whose only certainty is the
justice and impartiality that characterizes his position as security chief 75 on the space station.
His name comes from “Odo’Ital,” meaning “nothing” in Cardassian, the language of the
scientist who found him and was a loose translation of the label “unknown sample” which
adorned the beaker in which he was found (DS9 “Heart of Stone”). Odo is able to enforce
security on the space station by changing himself into any kind of object—animate or
inanimate, solid, liquid, or gas—but he also takes great pleasure in expanding his
understanding of the world by existing temporarily as a tree, or a rock, or any number of other
forms. Odo’s eyes are apparently not necessary for visual perception as he is able to witness
crimes while in the form that does not include eyes, although this is not directly explained in
the show. The exploration of Odo’s potential for conscious embodiment in DS9 recalls Thomas
Nagel’s argument from his 1974 article “What Is it Like to Be a Bat?” in which he theorizes that
one essential element of understanding conscious existence is understanding what it is like to
has accepted members from non-Federation worlds into Starfleet including Worf (Klingon) and Nog (Ferengi) and
has formed alliances with both the Klingon and Romulan Empires.
75
As security chief, Constable Odo displays a profound preoccupation with the concepts of justice and
duty. This deontological perspective is reminiscent of Kant’s Kritik der praktischen Vernunft and Grundlage der
Metaphysik der Sitten. Unfortunately, the current scope of this project will not allow me to explore Odo’s Kantian
connection further at this time.

113
be that thing. While Nagel does not cite Husserl directly, understanding what it is like to be any
particular conscious thing follows the phenomenologist’s insistence on the role of a specific,
lived perspective for consciousness inherent to his philosophy.
Further, the Odo mask worn by René Auberjonois76 in DS9 gives his face the
appearance of being made of wax, connoting an in-progress wax model of a human.
Regarding his appearance, Odo goes so far as to say that the human face is incredibly difficult
to replicate and the approximation that he wears is as close as he can get (DS9
“Shadowplay”). The ability to shapeshift and his waxen approximation of a human face shed
new light upon the Cardassian meaning of Odo’s name; rather than understanding “nothing” as
a lack of matter, and with it value, “nothing” here can be better understood as “no thing in
particular” as Odo’s existence is certain, but his form is not. Similar to Descartes’ thought
experiment regarding what he could doubt the existence of, Odo’s corporeal form is constantly
in question, but his consciousness is certain. Also recalling Descartes and his wax argument is
the fundamental doubt of appearances and people that is central to Odo’s character. After
observing Odo and his girlfriend Colonel Kira for the first time, the genetically enhanced
character, and newcomer to the station, Sarina remarks “And Kira, she never doubts herself,
which is what Odo finds so fascinating because he doubts everything but her” (DS9 Chrysalis).
With the roots of his character firmly embedded in the same philosophical thinking that
gave modern philosophy its exclusionist focus on the mind (Taipale 1), Odo incorporates
insights from Descartes, Fichte, Husserl, and Bukatman, embodying within his various forms
the essence of epistemological posthumanism. When Odo was found, he was young enough

76

While it does not strengthen my argument, it is a coincidence that the actor who plays Odo, the writer for
many DS9 episodes, and the originator of the wax argument all share a first name.

114
that he did not yet know that he was able to change forms; he simply existed as a liquid.
Through the tests done by the Bajoran Dr. Mora, Odo learned that he was able to take on the
shape of various objects, eventually other living things. His accuracy is such that when
scanned with a tricorder,77 Odo registers not as a Changeling, but as the figure he is in the
shape of. In addition to the Cartesian elements that I have already exculpated, Odo’s journey
of self discovery that characterizes one of the largest story arcs in DS9 rests on a Fichtean
foundation.
A successful positing of oneself according to Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre involves
substantial effort on the part of the individual and an Auffordern, or summoning, on the part of
the intersubjective community surrounding the individual in question. In the case of Odo, the
most extensive revelation of his backstory occurs in DS9 season five, episode twelve “The
Begotten,” in which Odo, made human as punishment by the Changelings, comes into the
possession of an infant Changeling. Doctor Mora Pol, the Bajoran scientist who worked with
Odo in the laboratory and discovered that he was sentient, arrives despite Odo’s wishes to the
contrary. Through the conversations between Odo and Dr. Mora78 it is revealed that Dr. Mora
performed a number of experiments on Odo before realizing that he was a sentient being,
many of which caused Odo discomfort. Doctor Mora continued experimenting on Odo after
realizing his sentience, still causing discomfort to Odo, to get Odo to change shape and
eventually take on his humanoid form. The discomfort of these experiments, which left Odo
with residual emotional baggage, was the intersubjective Auffordern that Odo needed in order
for him to posit himself as a sentient and self-directed individual.

77
78

A fictional device used for taking measurements of the environment or of living things.
Bajoran surnames come first.

115
With the exception of taking on various geometric shapes encouraged by the
experiments, the beginning of Odo’s self-positing occurs when, in response to a particularly
uncomfortable experiment, he forms himself into a tentacle and strikes Dr. Mora (DS9 “The
Begotten). Eventually Odo develops the ability to take on various geometric shapes, as well as
the forms of various living things. His form—that is to say, his intersubjective self or his
phenomenal body—is under the control of his self-posited consciousness. Odo answered the
intersubjective Auffordern of Dr. Mora by taking charge of his existence totally and completely.
He develops his Cartesian doubt as a means by which to judge the accuracy of his sensory
input against his own self-posited conceptions of reality. While Fichte’s self-positing ego of his
First Principle defines the terms of its own conscious existence for itself, Odo goes one step
further and posits not only his own consciousness, but makes his physical (phenomenological)
form subject to his consciousness as well. Odo’s shapeshifting abilities are returned to him
when the dying infant Changeling joins with Odo’s solid form. The first thing he does with his
newly regained abilities is to change into a hawk and soar around the space station,
reestablishing one of his defining qualities: his ability to posit his own consciousness and for
his consciousness to determine his phenomenal form.
Becoming a hawk not only celebrates his regained abilities, it literally demonstrates the
acquisition of new perspectives from which to perceive the world. Odo’s ability to experience
the world in any shape or as any object he chooses builds upon Husserl’s phenomenology,
and just as Odo took the self-positing of Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre one step further, he
expands upon Husserl’s phenomenology as well. For Husserl, all consciousness is always
conscious of something from a particular perspective. Due to the nature of embodied
subjectivity, one cannot perceive a phenomenon from all possible perspectives, although

116
further perspectives may be gained by changing the position or nature of observation. In order
to perceive an object without the influence of previous experience, the observer must engage
in the epoché, the setting aside of existing knowledge. Further, the perceivable sides of any
phenomenon are separated by those that are not by means of horizons, external and internal,
which conceal aspects of the phenomenon.
Odo demonstrates his willingness to set aside existing knowledge through his
interactions with other Changelings. In contrast to many other figures in DS9, Odo does not
automatically fear that other Changelings he meets are part of the Dominion.79 It is a remote
possibility that he would meet another who is not, but even so, he treats encounters with other
Changelings as opportunities to learn more about his people rather than as threats to himself
or his colleagues. As Changelings exist in a communal liquid form, they are able to link with
one another to share experiences and knowledge and it is though this that Odo is able to
transcend the horizons that ordinarily confine phenomenal perception. Odo, however, brings
new meaning to the Husserlian conception of transcendentalism. Rather than only phenomena
being transcendental—that is to say, existing independent of perception and equally available
to all—Odo himself is transcendental as he is able to transcend the confines of existence as
any one particular thing. Whether he has taken the form of a bird, a liquid, a loaf of bread, his
approximation of a human, or an actual human (a “solid” in the vernacular of the Changelings),
his consciousness remains intact, but he experiences existence as that object itself.
Odo’s shapeshifting presents a biological variation on the dream of human
consciousnesses uploaded into a computer and downloaded, as need be, into various forms of

79

The Dominion, and their Jem’Hadar minions, are the totalitarian antagonists from the Gamma Quadrant
of the Milky Way galaxy in the latter seasons of DS9.

117
physical body by Hans Moravec. In his discussion of mind-uploading, which he calls
transmigration, he offers two competing points of view regarding how identity is understood:
body-identity and pattern-identity. He writes:
Body-identity assumes that a person is defined by the stuff of which a human
body is made. Only by maintaining continuity of body stuff can we preserve an
individual person. Pattern-identity, conversely, defines the essence of a person,
say myself, as the pattern and the process going on in my head and body, not the
machinery supporting that process. If the process is preserved, I am preserved.
The rest is mere jelly. (117)
Moravec clearly favors pattern-identity, and a more appropriate description of Odo would be
impossible to find. In fact, within the same section Moravec uses the fictional technology of the
transporter from Star Trek to elaborate on the concept of pattern-identity. Physical materials,
including people, are reduced to energy by the transporter and then reassembled in a new
location. While this technology has been in every iteration of Star Trek, it is the Enterprise
series, set one hundred years before the birth of Captain James T. Kirk, that delves into the
metaphysical questions of pattern-identity (“Daedalus”). Ultimately the mistrust of transporter
technology is outweighed by the necessity of its use, offering one further example of Star
Trek’s epistemological bent. Interestingly, when Odo transports, he is reassembled bearing the
same form as when he left rather than as a puddle of gelatinous liquid, which constitutes his
natural state.
The malleability of Odo’s corporeal form mixed with the firm foundation of his
consciousness very easily situate him squarely within epistemological posthumanism;

118
however, in order for him to embody the very essence of this line of thinking, and indeed for
him to be the symbol of epistemological posthumanism, he must embody not just a
progression of epistemological philosophies, but also posthumanism itself. While this claim
may seem trite, since on one hand it is a necessary condition of my argument, and on the
other he is not a human and therefore does not have any humanness to overcome, it is vital to
remember that Odo chooses to appear human, not Bajoran, not Cardassian, Klingon, or
Ferengi. Odo is artificially a human, and he is so by choice. Odo is also not technically a
member of Starfleet, but the ethical system he creates for himself matches that of Starfleet
such that his actions never conflict with Starfleet ethics.
In contrast to Gomel, who shows disdain for both Star Trek and the slippage of
posthumanism back into humanism, I argue that it is this critical engagement with humanistic
values that is an essential part of posthumanism, and that the epistemological side offers
crucial insights into this engagement. Rather than accept the total failure of the Enlightenment
as theorized by Horkheimer and Adorno, I argue that Posthumanism, through science fiction,
functions as another attempt at achieving the ideals of Humanism, while attempting to work
through the inconsistencies and contradictions that plagued previous attempts As I have
previously noted, Hassan’s prescriptive construction of posthumanism can currently only be
seen as an ideal; the reality is that the attempt to reconcile the ideals of the Enlightenment
have taken two contradistinctive forms, which when analyzed as such provide necessary
insights into how the humanistic ideal is seen several centuries after its birth. Both Starfleet
and Odo function as iterations of the attempt to achieve this ideal in the twenty-fourth century.
Odo and Starfleet display a fluid deontological ethical structure; that is to say, that they
are primarily guided by duty and adherence to a series of principles (“human” rights and The

119
Prime Directive80), these are open to interpretation and circumstance. Odo’s deontology
reflects Kant’s emergence from a self-imposed immaturity in Beantwortung auf der Frage: Was
ist Aufklärung? as well as the necessary universalization of actions to be moral as discussed in
Grundlage der Metaphysik der Sitten. In contrast to Kant, however, Odo does not judge
morality based solely on intention. Odo (and Starfleet) function in their roles by championing
the human rights, rational agency, and universalization of actions of each individual—all of
which are defining elements of humanism—they succeed in ways that were not possible at the
time of the Enlightenment in that they face no contradiction from sexism,81 racism,82 or other
de facto and de jure inequalities.
With this base in humanistic philosophy, Odo embodies the position of Scott Bukatman
in Terminal Identity that “it is the purpose of much recent science fiction to construct a new
subject-position to interface with the global realms of data circulation, a subject that can
occupy or intersect the cyberscapes of contemporary existence” (8-9). This new subjectposition, according to Bukatman, is based in the dissolution of the fourth and final discontinuity
of human existence that Bruce Mazlish outlined in his 1995 book The Fourth Discontinuity. So
far, Mazlish argues, humans have experienced three “ego-smashing” historical moments: the
Copernican revolution, Darwin’s theories, and Freud’s insights into the unconscious. These
have all removed humans from their central and special place in creation. The fourth is the
idea that humans are distinct and discontinuous from the machines they create and to this
Bukatman argues “In fact, my thesis is that this fourth discontinuity must now be eliminated—
80

The Prime Directive prohibits the interference by Starfleet upon other worlds and cultures. In essence, it
guarantees the right to exist and develop of all people without imposition of “more advanced” cultures.
81
The change in women’s uniforms between TOS and TNG serves as partial evidence for this.
82
Racism against the Changelings is present through DS9, but it is always framed as an action
incongruous with Starfleet duty and the response of Captain Sisko and others always reestablishes the
humanistic ideal.

120
indeed, we have started on the task—and that in the process man’s ego will have to undergo
another rude shock” (8).
Bukatman analyzes this dissolution through several works including Tron and
Terminator II; however, since DS9 premiered in the same year that Terminal Identity was
published, Odo’s embodiment of this “terminal identity” was not yet developed in the series.
Odo’s repertoire of possible forms extends far beyond organic beings or basic inanimate
structures. The uniform Odo wears is not actually clothing, rather it is an extension of his body,
and may be changed at will, as is his communication badge (combadge). The combadge is a
highly complex piece of technology allowing the wearer to receive and transmit
communications and various other information from a great distance. More importantly,
however, it also interfaces automatically with the central computer terminals throughout the
station, logging the user in when a terminal is approached (TNG “The Drumhead”). As Odo’s
combadge is created, like his clothes, as part of his humanoid appearance, Odo is able to
interface personally with the computer, effectively removing the distinction between biological
and technological, organic and machine.
On a surface level, Odo’s standard appearance as a humanoid with a combadge
presents him as a cyborg figure—a reading reinforced by the ability he has to operate a
commandeered Jem’Hadar ship with headset-based controls where the human characters
cannot. It is true that Odo does function to break down some of the boundaries listed by Donna
Haraway in “A Manifesto for Cyborgs,” including male-female (he impersonates a female
Changeling, and as a liquid has no need for human gender), human-machine, human-animal,
et cetera. Haraway’s goal is the dissolution of these concepts as opposites, but her method is
to unite them, as opposites and without dialectical resolution into a new kind of whole (149).

121
Odo, however, is not faithful to Haraway’s materialism and goes beyond the mere joining of
previously opposed concepts. Odo is liquid, solid, and gas; he is biological, machine, and the
unification of both; in his natural state, he is without gender. He is Moravec’s transmigration,
but not limited to a machine substrate. Odo embodies Bukatman’s terminal subject by
symbolizing in its totality the biological-technological link that Bukatman describes (9). Odo is
the epitome of epistemological posthumanism; he is his consciousness, and his form is
whatever he wants it to be.
The Mass Effect Trilogy
As with many space-based science fiction narratives, including Star Trek, Mass Effect is
based on a galaxy of various alien races attempting to achieve a common goal. Like Star Trek,
Mass Effect focuses on a human protagonist83 who must work closely with numerous aliens to
complete the mission at hand, and who inevitably develops close relationships with these
nonhumans. One of the strengths of Star Trek, and a multitude of other science fiction
narratives, is the exploration of how consciousness could be understood and housed within
various kinds of bodies. Unfortunately for Star Trek and others, the format of a live-action
television show limits the kinds of alien races that may be developed; most beings are single
consciousnesses housed within humanoid bodies.84 The computer animated video games in
The Mass Effect Trilogy, however, offer much higher diversity in the bodily structures of the
aliens, as well as in the ways that consciousness may be conceptualized.

83

Episodes of Star Trek periodically feature different characters as protagonists; however, if one
overarching lead character can be said to exist in each series, it is the Captains: Kirk, Picard, Sisko, Janeway,
and Archer.
84
Some races like the Klingons, Ferengi, Cardassians and Andorians intricate involve prosthetics, while
many recurring Star Trek aliens receive simple changes to their ears, noses, eyebrows, and hair.

122
In Mass Effect the year is 2183, 35 years after humans discovered ancient ruins on
Mars. The ruins were built by a race called the Protheans, who disappeared roughly 50,000
years prior. Humans have only recently made contact with other spacefaring races and have
established an embassy on the Citadel, the seat of the Citadel Council, which functions as the
executive body within Citadel space. Humans are viewed by many other races as being too
immature to participate fully in galactic affairs; however, Commander Shepard, the protagonist
of Mass Effect, is granted the opportunity to redefine humanity in the eyes of the Citadel
races.85 Crucially for the gameplay, Shepard is made the first human SPECTRE (SPECial
Tasks and REcon), which means he86 does not answer politically to the Council and may use
whatever means he pleases in achieving his end.
One of the many strengths of Mass Effect is the customizability of Shepard with regard
to gender, appearance, abilities, and personality. Shepard can be male or female, has a fully
customizable physical appearance, and through the choice of different “character classes”
takes on various other abilities—mostly in combat. Shepard’s role as the leader of the galaxy
against the Reapers is not changeable in the game and, true to his aptronym, he may lead
through building cooperation or through brutality. According to Nick Yee, “people create slightly
idealized avatars based on their actual selves” (qtd. in Madigan); that is to say that both in
physical appearance and attitude, players’ avatars reflect the self that they would like to be.
The creation of the player’s avatar in Commander Shepard represents a distinctly
posthumanist take on Fichte’s three philosophical principles. In the creation of Shepard,

85

Citadel races are those who have embassies on the citadel, of which there are nine. The Citadel Council
is comprised of one representative each from the asari, turians, and salarians, who are also Citadel races.
86
Because I played a male Shepard, and for the sake of brevity, I will use the masculine pronoun to refer to
him.

123
players posit their surrogate selves in the simulacrum of the Mass Effect galaxy through
making choices about Shepard’s background (giving paragon or renegade bonuses), and the
numerous characteristics listed above. Players are able to continue positing their virtual selves
by choosing various dialogue options. Choosing options favoring cooperation among
characters gives Shepard paragon points, which give him enhances powers of persuasion, and
renegade points are awarded for choosing dialogue options that are rude, egoistic, and brutish.
Choices made during character creation (mainly about Shepard’s background and family), as
well as conversational options with other characters, in turn, demonstrate Fichte’s second
principle by influencing how non-player characters (NPCs) react to Shepard. These dialogue
options that arise through a high enough paragon or renegade score can have a significant
outcome on the game. During the mission “Virmire: Wrex and the Genophage87” in the first
game, Shepard and Wrex, a krogan, come into conflict over the mission to destroy the facility
researching a cure for the krogan genophage. If Shepard has earned a high enough paragon
score, he is able to negotiate a compromise with Wrex and they cooperate. If not, another crew
member, Ashley, will shoot and kill Wrex for disobeying orders. Actions beyond Shepard’s
control, that is to say in the external world, are determined by how Shepard has defined
himself. Just as Fichte outlined, it is the constant striving and limiting relationship between
Shepard and the external world that defines the course of the game.
The alien races of Mass Effect present themselves less as archetypes of human
personality traits than those in Star Trek; however, this is still true to some extent. Even so, the

87

One major plot point in Mass Effect is that to quell a rebellion by the reptilian species, the krogan.
Engineered by the salarians and deployed by the turians (all three now allies of Shepard), the genophage
reduced krogan reproduction to 1 surviving offspring in 1000 births. The mission on Virmire is to destroy a facility
being used by Saren (a turian indoctrinated by the Reapers and the main antagonist of the first game) to reverse
the genophage. Because Wrex is a member of Shepard’s crew, Wrex is against destroying a possible cure at first.

124
diversity among the types of beings in Mass Effect displays a greater range of possibilities for
how consciousness may be conceived and in what kind of body it may appear. Life in Mass
Effect is broken down into two broad categories: organic and synthetic, and from there broken
down further into individuals, meldable individuals, and hives. This is complicated further by
the fact that nearly all races in the Mass Effect galaxy are cyborgs in one respect or another.
The second game of the series opens with the death of Commander Shepard, and ultimate
rebuilding and bringing back to life by the humancentric corporation, Cerberus. From this point
on, Shepard is a cyborg in the most literal sense; however, if he was given a tech or biotic
class in the first game, he has been a cyborg all along.
Among the various races of Mass Effect, the synthetic are the Reapers, the geth
(including Legion), and EDI (pronounced like the feminine name Edie).88 The Reapers and the
geth both function as decentralized hive intelligences, while Legion is an individually contained
hive mind, and EDI is (eventually) an unshackled artificial intelligence (AI). Among the
biological races, the Thorian, encountered in the first game, is an ancient sentient plant
capable of enthralling victims to protect it or work for it. The rachni are a telepathic insect race
and the only example of a biological hive mind in the games. The asari, a race of femalelooking, hermaphroditic beings with a strong matriarchal culture are individuals, but like the
Vulcans in Star Trek, are able to link minds with other beings.
The assumed division between organic and synthetic life is further elucidated in the
characters’ eyes. While the eyes of normal organics appear simply as receivers for light, the
eyes of cyborgs and synthetics produce light of their own. Most notably, the geth are called

88

The Mass Effect codex within the game lists an ancient, but now extinct, synthetic race as the Zha’til, as
well as a race of virtual aliens discovered in 2010.

125
“flashlight heads” by the quarians and the Reapers have a single “eye” that emits a red laser
weapon. In the second game, the Illusive Man’s cybernetic contacts appear to shine brightly in
the dark of his room. Fitting the Illusive Man’s questionable ethics, if Shepard follows the
Renegade path, the cybernetic implants in his eyes will glow with a strikingly similar pattern to
the Illusive Man’s. Further, organics who have been indoctrinated, such as Saren Arterius, the
main adversary of the first game, display glowing eyes—a motif that is represented on the
cover for the original Mass Effect game (Figure 1). In the beginning of the trilogy, the
dichotomy between lighted and dark eyes serves as an easy determiner of friend or foe;
however, the progression of the games complicates matters. In the cinematic trailer for the
third game, the horror of the Reaper invasion is reflected in a child’s eye; the enormous black
machines contrasting starkly with the innocence and fundamental humanness of the eye
(Figure 2). Ultimately the motif of eyes returns in the final decision, which I will discuss below.
A strong distinction is made within Mass Effect between AI’s and virtual intelligences
(VI’s), the most notably of which is the illegality of the former. Reservations about the creation
of fully self-aware computer programs predated the creation of the geth, but these, and their
subsequent rebellion against their quarian creators, served to solidify the illegality of AI
creation. VI’s, on the other hand, are better defined as weak artificial intelligences; they are
able to support interaction on a limited range of topics, are not self-aware, and are unable to
make decisions for themselves. This attempt to control synthetic life reiterates the reason the
Catalyst89 gives Shepard in the third game for creating the Reapers originally: the Catalyst was
created by the Leviathans in order to solve the problem of organics creating synthetics and
those synthetics rebelling against their creators. Ultimately, the Catalyst rebelled against the
89

The Catalyst is the AI that controls the Reapers. It is responsible for their construction and their cyclical
harvesting of organic life.

126
Leviathans and harvested them to create the first Reaper, Harbinger. The Catalyst explains
that organics build synthetics to improve their existence, but then impede the evolution of the
synthetics, resulting in conflict. By harvesting organic life every fifty millennia, the Catalyst
intends to prevent such conflict by preserving advanced organic life.
The obviously flawed understanding of “conflict” by the Catalyst results in horrific
violence around the galaxy and appears as the latest iteration of the trope of “the creation out
of control.” Since the story of Rabbi Loew’s golem running amok, stories such as
Frankenstein’s monster, Karel Čapek’s 1921 play R.U.R., Harry Piel’s Der Herr der Welt, Isaac
Asimov’s I, Robot and countless other works of science fiction, the creator losing control of the
creation is at once a source of genuine fear90 and a continuously popular conflict in narratives.
This conflict sits at the heart of the schism within posthumanism that I am outlining in this
dissertation: namely, whether synthetic and organic life forms are mutually exclusive because
of fundamentally different ontologies. Theorists and authors who would answer positively to
this general question will be considered in chapter three; however, the authors considered in
this chapter place the emphasis on the consciousness itself rather than the physical form. The
final decision in Mass Effect places the player in the position of tackling this very conundrum.
While this concluding decision functions as the final reflection of the player’s views on
how organics and machines may be fundamentally compatible or fundamentally different, there
are recurring elements of the narrative throughout all three games that elucidate how
nonhuman cultures within the narrative grapple with the question, ultimately readying the
player to decide the fate of the Reapers, and with them all synthetic life in the galaxy. As
90

In December 2014 Stephen Hawking made headlines by warning against the development of strong AI
by saying “Humans, who are limited by slow biological evolution, couldn't compete and would be superseded.”
(http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540)

127
previously noted, most organics have been implanted with some form of technology rendering
them cyborgs; however, this blurring of the lines between synthetics and organics, naturally,
comes to a head through Shepard. As he heals from Project Lazarus91 through the second
game, his actions determine the amount of scarring left by the cybernetic implants. Playing
paragon decreases the scarring and visibility of the implants, while playing renegade increases
their visibility. This serves to underscore the general thinking in the Mass Effect galaxy that
synthetics are not to be trusted and are inherently different from organics. This thinking
prevails until the final decision, whereupon, if Shepard has gained the synthesis ending,92 the
Catalyst will remind him that synthetics are already a part of him and life as he knows it. One of
the possible load screens in the second game features the twisting double helix of human DNA
and the image of Da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man, which on one hand emphasizes the quantified
understanding of the human required for Project Lazarus (Figure 3). On on the other, and in
the context of a space-based game, this image recalls Ihab Hassan’s characterization of
humanism symbolized by the Vitruvian Man’s “arms and legs defining the measure of things,
so marvelously drawn by Leonardo” as linked with the era after humanism in which “[the
Vitruvian Man] has broken through its enclosing circle and square, and spread across the
cosmos” (843).
While most of the cyborg elements of the organics are built into the games’ combat
scenarios,93 there are situations where organics interface directly with technology, presenting a
space-based take on Bukatman’s terminal identity. In the Overlord mission, Shepard

91

As its name implies, Project Lazarus is the Cerberus effort to rebuild Shepard and bring him back to life
at the beginning of the second game.
92
The four ending choices will be discussed in detail further on in this section.
93
With the exception, of course, of the quarians, who need their biosuits to survive beyond the confines of
their homeworld, Rannoch.

128
encounters David Archer, an autistic savant who is able to communicate directly with the geth.
David’s brother, however, has subjected him to a number of unethical and dangerous
experiments that have given his parent company, Cerberus, valuable information about the
geth, but have also exploited David and endangered his life. Later on, Shepard meets Legion,
a geth with a self-contained Gestalt consciousness designed to operate away from the hive. In
order to eradicate dangerous Reaper code in the geth mainframe (called the Consensus),
Shepard interfaces directly with the geth hive and is reconstituted in a TRON-style physical
representation of the code. These instances demonstrate contemporary ideas put forth by
Bukatman and Moravec, but also show the strong influence of phenomenological thinking.
Project Overlord is a mission in Mass Effect 2, in which Shepard is called to the aid of a
station that has been overrun by a rogue VI. As Shepard comes to find out, the VI in question
is actually a hybrid between a VI designed by Cerberus in an attempt to control the geth and
David Archer. David’s brother, Gavin Archer, is leading the project, but when, after some test
with his autistic and mathematical savant brother, Gavin learns that David can speak directly to
the geth, Gavin forces David into increasingly unethical and dangerous experiments. The geth
exhibit a strong religious predilection, with some believing that the Reapers are gods, and
through the VI and David Archer, Cerberus hopes to exploit their religious beliefs and turn
them against the Reapers.
Synthetic life, in the Mass Effect galaxy, has up to this point mostly been considered to
be a fundamentally different kind to organic life, and fundamentally dangerous. One of
Shepard’s crew—Tali, a quarian, the race who built the geth—remarks “synthetic races have
no use whatsoever for organics—they don't have the same needs or drives as biological
creatures, so they have no need to trade resources or information with them” (Mass Effect).

129
This encourages the position that synthetic and organic life are of two separate ontologies;
however, the human-computer interface developed with David Archer serves to show that a
union between the two is not only possible through technology adapted for use by organics
(cybernetic implants, et cetera), but it is also possible for organics to adapt themselves to fit
synthetic life.
This new kind of compatibility raises the ante on the dissolution of the organic-synthetic
boundary. David Archer succeeds at entering a new kind of spatiality, what Bukatman calls
terminal space, but is also often called the Matrix, the Net, the Web and so forth.
Whether “cyberspace” is a real place or not, our experience of electronic space is
a “real” experience. By distinguishing the constitution of being as an activity of
interface, phenomenology suggests that the status of being is not an absolute
condition, but one that changes relative to changes in the experience of the real.
(118)
By directly interfacing his brain with the Cerberus VI, David Archer exists simultaneously within
the physical space of the research station and within the cyberspace of the stations electronic
systems. It becomes apparent, however, that Archer’s existence within this terminal space is
not just limited to the remote control of computers and security robots. When Shepard attempts
to access the VI’s main terminal, Archer links himself with Shepard’s mind through his
cybernetic implants. Shepard, then, while walking around a virtual version of the lab that bears
striking visual resemblance to The Matrix, sees David’s memories of the experiments done to
him.
The human-technological interface, which Bukatman refers to as terminal penetration, is
taken to its horrific extreme in the case of David Archer. Of virtual realities, Bukatman writes:

130
By now the image is becoming clear—but not quite. A figure stands in a kind of
high-tech bondage. Wires and cables snake from gloves and sensors to a pair of
hard-crunching computers off to the side. The head is enshrouded by an
elaborate apparatus that blocks the subject’s eyes and ears.…This is not,
however, some sensory deprivation nightmare. The subject is comfortably
ensconced in virtual reality, a cybernetic paraspace comprised of real-time
interactive data. (185-6)
Bukatman’s description of human-computer interface and the virtual reality the subject enters
is at once alien and intriguing; however, by changing the meaning of “subject” from
Bukatman’s phenomenological meaning to the one upon whom an experiment is performed,
especially as this is contrasted with the modern terminology of “participant,” the horrors of
David’s situation begin to materialize. David Archer first appears as a large, floating green face
made up of individual virtual squares (Figure 4). Recalling aesthetic elements of The Matrix
Trilogy mixed with Cartesian geometric grid patterns, the David-VI synthesis projects a cool
and emotionless, yet human face to contrast with the chaotic green squares emanating from
the technology that he appropriates control of elsewhere in the mission.
This façade soon dissolves to reveal the physical body of David Archer, who Cerberus
hoped to be a new messiah for the geth, strung up in the form of a cross with numerous
machines contorting his face and body. With wires holding his eyes open in the style of the
Ludovico treatment in A Clockwork Orange (1971), his mouth stretched open by the insertion
of hoses, wires connected to his arms, and a neck brace that forms a halo around his head,
David is the epitome of sacrifice and betrayal in the name of technological interface (Figure 5).

131
This is hardly the techno-utopia conceived of by Moravec; however, that is not to say
that the lesson of Project Overlord is to keep organic and synthetic ontologies separate: the
problem is how to expand the possibilities of human consciousness and existence while
maintaining the basic humanist ethics. Once Gavin Archer recognizes the terribleness of his
experiment, Shepard is given the option either to remind him of the information gained and
leave David in his care (increases renegade score), or to take him away from his brother and
hide him in Grissom Academy where Shepard argues he will be safe. The mission ends with
David repeating Gavin’s words regarding the beginning of the experiments, when David was
free and choosing to communicate with the geth: “it all seemed harmless.” The moral
questions driving the Overlord mission reinforce the rest of the conflicts within the game: the
staggering technological advancement that has happened since humans discovered the mass
relays94 have only served to complicate notions of morality, especially the intrinsic value of
living beings,95 which was a fundamental question in Enlightenment humanism. Similar to Star
Trek, the epistemological posthumanism of Mass Effect roots itself in the re-engagement with
humanism’s fundamental tenets and questions through interactions with diverse imaginings of
other persons as well as other possibilities for being human.
Similarly to the efforts by Gavin Archer and Cerberus to begin forging a link between
humans and geth, and in stark contrast to the remark by Tali that synthetics have no use for
organics, the geth have constructed a unique mobile platform that96 is comprised of a Gestalt

94

The mass relays are a network of stationary transportation devices making travel around the vast
distances of the galaxy feasible. The closest relay to Earth was, when originally observed by astronomers, named
Charon and was thought to be Pluto’s moon.
95
Before entering the facility where David Archer is being held, Shepard must navigate the terrain of the
planet in a sort of combination hovercraft-tank. If he runs over any of the local wildlife, the craft’s computer says
“The galactic humane society would like to remind you that animals are people too.”
96
Legion is most often referred to as “it” while referring to itself as “we.” The other AI on board, EDI, is
referred to as “she” and refers to herself as “I.” Using the feminine pronoun with EDI, the Normandy’s computer,

132
consciousness and able to operate away from the Consensus in order to make contact with,
and better understand, organic life forms. This is the first recorded attempt to communicate
peacefully with organics by the geth since they retreated behind the Perseus Veil, a difficult to
navigate nebula, following their war with their creators, the quarians. The quarians created the
geth to serve as a cheap military and labor force, but through the desire to make them more
efficient in their tasks, the quarians created a hive intelligence that was so complex that the
geth began to question whether they had souls and what the purpose of their lives were to be.
The quarians’ response to this self-aware AI was pure hostility and many geth took up arms to
defend themselves, while others suggested they shut themselves off to end the conflict. The
geth drove the quarians from their homeworld and killed the majority of the population;
however, once the quarians were no longer a threat, the geth retreated to solitude behind the
Perseus Veil.
In the third game, Shepard receives the mission Rannoch: Geth Fighter Squadrons,
after being asked by the quarians’ Migrant Fleet97 to come to their rescue. Legion hypothesizes
that these “heretic geth” can be stopped by destroying the Reaper code in their Consensus.
Legion presented Shepard with a similar situation in the second game during Legion’s loyalty
mission “Legion: A House Divided.” Legion reported that there has been a schism amongst the
geth with some following the “Old Machines,” the Reapers, as gods and others desiring
peaceful relations with organics. Legion refers to those following the Reapers as “heretics” and
gives Shepard the option of either rewriting their programming or destroying them. If Shepard
chooses to rewrite them, he not only gains Paragon points and wins the former heretic geth to
may have originated as an extension of referring to ships in the feminine with an appropriate voice added to the AI
later.
97
After the geth war, the remaining quarians fled their world and their hostile creations. The similarities in
the quarians’ history to Battlestar Galactica are numerous.

133
his side, he displays the humanistic belief that these geth are redeemable through education,
and that because of their intrinsic value as living beings, they are worth the effort.
During Rannoch: Geth Fighter Squadrons, Shepard is not given the option of whether to
rewrite or destroy the geth—this time he is trying to remove Reaper code that has “infected,” in
Legion’s terms, the heretic Consensus,98 after which Legion will report that it has already
rewritten the geth fight against the Reapers. On the way to Rannoch, Legion explains that
Shepard will have to interface directly with the Consensus in order to destroy the Reaper code
infection. Shepard is immediately taken aback, but Legion explains that Shepard has already
entered virtual space during the Project Overlord mission and that this is essentially no
different. Legion is correct that Shepard’s interface with David Archer was a similar experience
to what this will be; however, during Overlord, the hybrid David-VI tapped into Shepard’s
cybernetics in order to project a virtual reality onto the real physical space of the facility.
Because Shepard was already in the physical space in which David’s memories took place, it
was simply a matter of changing the way Shepard perceived what was already surrounding
him. By interfacing with Shepard, the David-VI hybrid altered the Lebenswelt in which Shepard
existed, as well as the sensory faculties he possessed for perceiving phenomena.
In order to enter the Consensus, Shepard climbs into a small chamber with a seat and
is physically scanned in a way reminiscent of Tron before his consciousness enters the virtual
space of the Consensus. Legion remarks that it has altered the code of the Consensus to
appear familiar to Shepard—there is a physical pathway, he is carrying a gun, and infected
strings of code are seen as throbbing orange tubes shaped like neurons. Regarding existing in
such a virtual reality, Bukatman writes:
98

During a later mission, Shepard will be faced with the question of whether to destroy the geth, destroy
the quarians, or make peace between them.

134
To be installed into such an apparatus would be to exist on two planes at once:
while one’s objective body would remain in the real world, one’s phenomenal body
would be projected into the terminal reality. In an ecstatic exaggeration of
Merleau-Ponty’s99 phenomenological model, world and body comprise a
continually modifying feedback loop, producing a terminal identity without the
terminal—a cybersubject. (187)
Shepard is not sitting at a computer terminal; like Bukatman describes, his interface with the
Consensus is through his brain directly, superseding his need for eyes. His Körper remains in
a stationary pod guarded by his squad, but his Leib takes on a new virtual form, and while his
perspective remains a familiar one thanks to the arrangement of a virtual “body” (i.e. a
perspectival vantage point) for him by Legion.
Shepard’s experience in the geth Consensus mirrors, albeit in a much more
sophisticated and all-encompassing way, the experience of the player controlling Shepard. By
entering the virtual space of the Consensus, Shepard is, in its bare essence, playing a
computer game of his own, creating a level of experiential reality beyond the normal playercharacter relationship. The Shepard in the Consensus is not the Shepard in the rest of the
trilogy, at least not with regard to his physical body. With Legion as the game’s programmer,
Shepard is given a familiar, phenomenal body and computer code is rendered perceivable to
consciousness while being piped directly into his consciousness via his interface with the
Consensus. The player now controls Shepard’s consciousness and virtual body in a computer
simulation of a simulated reality within a computer, the PC or other platform, upon which the
99

As previously noted, Merleau-Ponty’s notion of the body and embodiment is an extension of Husserl’s
own thinking on the subject. Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology began incorporating elements of a philosophy of
embodiment as early as 1945 while Husserl’s writing on the subject in Ideen II was published posthumously in
1952.

135
player is interacting with the simulation that is the Mass Effect game is producing the computer
simulation of the geth Consensus. This is rendered phenomenal within the original simulation
of Mass Effect, itself computer code rendered phenomenal through the human-computer
interface of the screen, speakers and controller.
The function of this mission is twofold within the game. The first is to further expand
upon the phenomenological rendering of the electronic virtual realities in Overlord. While
observing memories being replayed, Shepard remarks that the quarians are wearing their
familiar biosuits, but since they are on their homeworld, they should have no use for them.
Legion’s response is to ask Shepard how many quarians he’s seen without their suits. This not
only functions to reinforce the phenomenological nature of Shepard’s existence in the
Consensus, it refers back to the nature of outside world in Fichte’s second principle. After the
subject has posited itself as a subject, the next step is to posit the outside world as object. This
objective realm is on one hand separate and distinct from the subject, but on the other built out
of the subject’s own subjectivity—that is to say that while Legion is causing the Consensus to
appear as phenomenal for Shepard, it is Shepard’s own consciousness that is the real
architect of the experience. Shepard appears in the Consensus as he knows himself (with
recreations of his normal phenomenological perspective, Leib, gun, et cetera.). The
Consensus, too, is rendered familiar with walking paths, familiar physics, things to shoot, and
so on. He has no trouble separating his consciousness from his physical body, so long as it
has a virtual perspective once it is in the virtual space.
This interface between Shepard and the Consensus reinforces the primacy of the
epistemological over the ontological. Shepard is truly able to experience the Consensus
subjectively without his human mind being tied to a human, or as the case may be, cyborg,

136
bodily existence. Phenomenal experience in Mass Effect is based in Husserl’s conception of
the Leib as a perspective of perception. Legion chose specifically to give Shepard a digitally
reproduced version of the body he was used to, even though any kind may have been
possible. The consequence is that Shepard is able to transition into the virtual realm
seamlessly and by being given a familiar rendering of his Lebenswelt and Leib, he is not
focused on his own existence as digitally rendered phenomenon—his consciousness is
directed toward the phenomena of Reaper code and replayed geth memory.
Second, this mission gives the player significant insight regarding the nature of synthetic
life, and the geth’s history in particular. These insights prepare the player for two crucial
decisions to come: deciding the fate of the geth and quarians, and deciding the fate of the
Reapers. While Mass Effect focuses on one hand on the epistemological basis for existence
and the inherent equality of persons,100 on the other it repeatedly returns to the question of
whether synthetic life should be allowed to exist. Once Shepard has witnessed the innocence
of the geth and the brutality of the quarians as the geth attempted to determine the nature of
their existence, he is forced to reconsider the idea that synthetic life is inherently dangerous
with the reality he has seen. The second mission on the quarian homeworld, Priority: Rannoch,
which can only be completed after the Geth Fighter Squadron mission puts Shepard in the
position of reconciling the perceived inevitable hostility toward organics by the geth with the
true brutality of the quarians’ past and the larger culture of racism that it represents.
After killing the Reaper on Rannoch that has been controlling the geth, Legion says “We
can confirm that the geth are no longer being directed by the Old Machines [Reapers]. We are

100

Even playing as a renegade, Shepard is equally brutal to everyone in normal interactions. Renegade
points are awarded for choosing to kill the geth, for example, but they are also awarded for choosing to kill the
quarians.

137
free.” Over the radio, the commanders of the quarian fleet say that they see their opportunity to
defeat the geth, to which Legion responds “Shepard-Commander, the geth only acted in
defense after the Creators [quarians] attacked. Do we deserve death?” Shepard asks what
Legion is suggesting and it says “Our upgrades. With the Old Machine dead, we could upload
them to all geth without sacrificing their independence.” Tali objects that this would make the
geth as smart as when the Reaper was controlling them. Legion’s replies “Yes, but with free
will. Each geth unit would be a true intelligence. We would be alive, and we could help you.”
(Mass Effect 3) Legion’s appeal to Sheppard is for him to allow the geth to experience their
own Enlightenment. With Legion’s help, and ultimate self-sacrifice, the geth will gain
knowledge, free will, and self determination, all core tenets of humanism, forcing Shepard to
stand face-to-face with his own humanistic beliefs. The only decision that awards paragon
points is to forge a compromise between the geth and the quarians, which recognizes and
reaffirms the value of both organic and synthetic life.
This decision functions as a direct prologue to the games’ final decision: whether to
destroy, control, or synthesize with the Reapers.101 Once on board the Citadel, the Catalyst
reveals to Shepard the reason for the Reapers’ existence: conflict between synthetics and
organics is inevitable and so by harvesting advanced civilizations, the Reapers are preserving
them in the form of other Reapers and thereby imposing order upon the galaxy. The Catalyst
claims that this is not in conflict with the main goal of organic life, to better its existence through
technology, and therefore the harvesting should not be seen as a conflict either. Throughout
the third game, Shepard has had the task of building the galaxy’s Effective Military Strength

101

One can also choose not to decide, but in choosing this option the player still has made a choice.
However, in avoiding this decision, Shepard proves himself unworthy of the opportunity to have led the galaxy in
this way and the Reapers continue to harvest organic life.

138
(EMS), which will determine whether Shepard is able to unlock the synthesis ending. The
nature of the synthesis ending as an achievement that may be unlocked underscores its
importance to the games’ overall narrative and philosophical goal.
The effect of choosing the destroy option is readily apparent: the Reapers are
destroyed, along with all of their technology and, depending on the player’s EMS, Earth (and
Shepard) may or may not survive. Either way, the cycle of harvesting stops and organic life
continues while all synthetic life perishes. This option reinforces the supremacy of the
biological in the face of the mechanical Other and demonstrates that even though the games
experimented with various other incarnations of consciousness and personhood, the player
believes synthetic life to be so alien as not to deserve personhood status, or even existence.
By choosing to control the Reapers, Shepard sacrifices corporeality and his consciousness
replaces the Catalyst as the Reapers’ master. Again, depending on the EMS, Earth may or
may not survive. In the final cut scenes, Shepard speaks of himself as both a messiah and the
figurative shepherd of all life, synthetic and organic. While he has merged with synthetics, this
is a sacrifice he has made for living beings everywhere. This option rests on the idea that while
an exchange of corporeal existence for immortality within a computer is possible, organic life
as a whole is not ready to make that step yet. Synthetics around the galaxy continue their
existences, but do so as fundamentally separate from their organic counterparts; the separate
purposes of organic and synthetic life laid out by the Catalyst are reaffirmed. These two
options present takes on biological and mechanical existences more in tune with the
ontological arguments in the next chapter.
If Shepard has managed to secure an EMS high enough, he unlocks the possibility of
synthesizing all organic and synthetic life. Similar to the control option, in doing this, Shepard

139
sacrifices his corporeality and adds his consciousness to the Reapers and the Catalyst. The
Crucible102 emits a pulse of green light that changes organic DNA to be comprised partially of
synthetic code, and changes synthetic code to incorporate organic DNA. After the pulse, it is
no longer just the cybernetic creations of the Reapers whose eyes glow, now everyone’s eyes
and skin glow with the cybernetic augmentations that signal the knowledge of eons of
civilization. The conflict simply ceases and previous enemies turn their glowing eyes toward
each other with expressions of deep understanding and empathy. The final monologue is done
by EDI, who begins simply “I am alive” (Mass Effect 3). By synthesizing, all life now posses the
collective knowledge of all of the cultures who were previously harvested by the Reapers and a
new era of galactic peace is born.
While BioWare has not released data about the popularity of each ending among
players, it is clear that as an unlockable achievement, the synthesis ending is more desirable
in the conception of the designers than the control or destroy options. By choosing synthesis,
Shepard, as a symbol for both organic and synthetic life, transcends his “selbst verschuldete
Unmündigkeit” that Kant describes in “Beantwortung auf der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?” Had
Shepard simply followed the orders of his superior officers, and decided in the face of the
question “so brauche ich mich ja nicht selbst zu bemühen” (Kant 9) he would have chosen the
destroy option. The control option is equally troublesome regarding Kant’s thinking as it simply
substitutes Shepard into the role of authority that the Catalyst had previously held. In this
outcome, the pure and unfeeling logic of the AI is exchanged for Shepard’s will, which then
commands both absolute power and knowledge over the galaxy—a benevolent totalitarian is a
totalitarian nonetheless. However, by choosing synthesis Shepard disperses the knowledge of
102

This is the weapon that was being built against the Reapers, comprised of the Citadel, the Crucible itself,
and the Catalyst (before it is revealed that the Catalyst is the AI controlling the Reapers)

140
countless civilizations, and the various epistemological methods of the various kinds of life and
consciousness, to all. Living up to Kant’s motto for the Enlightenment “sapere aude!” Shepard
dares to know for himself which is the best option, but in doing so also creates the conditions
that will allow everyone else to embrace the motto as well.
Kant is quite explicit in how to achieve this: “Zu dieser Aufklärung aber wird nichts
erfordert als Freiheit” (Kant 11). In the narrowest understanding of Kant, any decision Shepard
makes falls short of this expression of Enlightenment; however, by understanding Freiheit
more broadly as “a set of conditions characterized by the equal and free access to selfeducation and self-improvement,” the synthesis ending expresses that in a much more far
reaching totality than Kant could have imagined. By synthesizing all synthetic and organic life,
Shepard has, as noted above, granted all living beings access to the collected knowledge of
eons of galactic civilization. Further, there is now no further conflict between organics and
synthetics regarding organics seeking to better their lives through technology and synthetics
needing to evolve beyond their organic creators; the knowledge and ability to self improve are
now equally available to all through the very posthumanist integration of technology and
biological life.
Choosing to synthesize organic and synthetic life thus promotes a technologically
enhanced version of humanism, similarly to Star Trek, where the goals of the Enlightenment
are actually achieved and its values practiced. The differences between Mass Effect and Star
Trek, however, center around each series’ relationship to the achievement of these goals. In
Roddenberry’s work, Earth has already gone through a devastating nuclear world war and
wars around the creation of genetically engineered super-soldiers. In 2063, Zefram Cochrane
succeeds in traveling faster than the speed of light, after which Vulcans land on Earth to make

141
first contact. From this time, through the Enterprise series,103 Earth and Starfleet encounter
vast numbers of alien species causing humanity to look at itself differently and grow out of its
selbst verschuldete Unmündigkeit very quickly, culminating in the foundation of the United
Federation of Planets at the end of Enterprise in 2161. From this point on, and especially with
Captain Kirk’s tenure beginning in 2265, the conflict of the series centers on how to reconcile
and maintain Starfleet’s (post)humanistic values in difficult and unexpected situations. These
values strengthen with Captain Picard in TNG where the role of captain has changed from Kirk
as the egotistical cowboy to Picard as the older, wiser diplomat. In Mass Effect, the dramatic
tension forms from Shepard’s interactions with other beings and various key decisions along
the way to the question of the Reapers. To play the paragon throughout the game is, as
expected, to already possess and demonstrate the (post)humanistic values that the rest of the
galaxy will benefit from. If one chooses to play the renegade, one can still emerge from
immaturity at the end of the game, and in that case, Shepard may experience just as much
personal growth during the course of the three games as comes with the final decision.

Conclusion
The symbolic dichotomy of light and dark that has been used since the Enlightenment to
denote subscription or adherence to humanistic ethical principles and a rational means of
thinking has appeared in various incarnations in post-Enlightenment epistemologies. While
these six works have been taken as paradigm examples, the imagery and motif of sight as
connected to ethics permeates many works beyond those included here. George Lucas’ Star
Wars franchise hinges on the dark and light sides of The Force, the main villains of Babylon 5
103

Enterprise was not as well received by fans as other iterations of the franchise; however, what it lacks in
entertainment value (especially the first two seasons), is made up for in the depiction of the philosophical struggle
that Captain Archer must go through in his missions leading up to the founding of the United Federation of
Planets.

142
are the Shadows who contrast starkly with the wise and fair Vorlons, beings of pure light
energy, the evil Professor Wolf, clad all in black, in Harry Piel’s Der Herr der Welt contrasts
with the benevolent Doktor Heller, Doctor Who is able to use a light up sonic screwdriver to
thwart villains and save humanity against, among others, the weeping angels who only move
when they cannot be seen, and the list goes on.
The evolution of epistemologies since Kant’s attempt to reconcile Descartes’ rationalism
with Hume’s empiricism have progressed on the model of Fichte’s own epistemology. Fichte’s
concern centered on the subject’s self-conscious self-positing as the grounding for all
experience with the external world being a product of one’s own conscious mind. Husserl took
the position of the subject as already given and turned the focus onto the perception of
phenomena, whether as external objects or as internal states of being (memories, feelings, et
cetera), from certain perspective. Incorporating both epistemologies and dissolving the
distinction between subjective perception and phenomenal existence is the posthumanist
epistemology described by Scott Bukatman. By mixing together Fichte’s idealism and
Husserl’s phenomenology, Bukatman describes how science fiction and cyberculture imagine
subjective existence that transcends the human body as the only possible perceptual vessel
for sentient life. Once the focus of existence is removed from the body and placed on
consciousness, posthumanism returns to its roots in humanistic ethics, often through the motif
of light, sight, and eyes.
Hassan also uses ocular metaphor to describe the shift from humanism to
posthumanism.

143
We need to understand that the human form—including human desire and all its
external representations—may be changing radically, and thus must be revisioned. We need to understand that five hundred years of humanism may be
coming to an end, as humanism transforms itself into something that we must
helplessly call posthumanism. (843)
Hassan’s statement, however, that “five hundred years of humanism may be coming to an
end,” in the light of contemporary posthumanist science fiction seems problematic. On one
hand, the case has been made by Horkheimer and Adorno, as well as others, that humanism
and the Enlightenment have already failed. In fact, The Terror following the French Revolution
may have signaled humanism’s failure already during the Enlightenment itself.
As this chapter has shown, post-Enlightenment epistemologies have endeavored to
create, over the last two centuries, a new understanding of existence centered on
consciousness in any of its possible forms. If Badmington’s claim that “humanism is always
becoming posthumanism” and Gomel’s lamentation that posthumanism is slipping back into
humanism are both correct, then, in the light of this chapter, Hassan’s claim that half a
millennium of humanism may be coming to an end is missing the key element that
epistemological posthumanism functions to re-imagine the subject in such a way that marks a
new kind of highly technological and decentered re-engagement with the principles of
humanism without falling victim to anthropocentrism.

144
Image Appendix

Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3

145
Figure 4

Figure 5

146

Chapter 3: The Ontologists Strike Back
Leib bin ich ganz und gar, und Nichts außerdem; und
Seele ist nur ein Wort für etwas am Leibe.
– Friedrich Nietzsche, Also Sprach Zarathustra
“Von den Verächtern des Leibes”

The reactions of the ontologists against German idealism, phenomenology, and
epistemological Posthumanism are numerous, but most often center around one core
argument: it is not possible for humans to exist outside of human bodies, nor outside of the
spatio-temporal context of the world. In other words, whereas epistemological Posthumanism
and its forebears claim a noetic and self-directed perceptual action as the basis of human
existence, the ontological lineage of Posthumanism stresses the unified mind/body/world
relationship as the most fundamental element of human existence. This unity can be seen as
operating counter to most trends within popular Posthumanism; however, I argue that the
trends most often thought of as the whole of Posthumanism are better understood as only the
epistemological half of the larger movement.
While epistemological Posthumanism imagines the effects of expanding consciousness
beyond the human body and brain, an ontological Posthumanism is not only possible, it is a
necessary half of the larger posthumanist movement that serves to move beyond the mindbody dichotomy of Enlightenment humanism that the epistemological side perpetuates, and to
extend this unity beyond the mind and body into the spatio-temporal context of the world itself.
At first glance, works that stress the unified ontology of mind/body/world appear as antiPosthumanist; however, to see these works as antagonistic to those of epistemological
Posthumanism is to perpetuate the same dualistic thinking that they are trying to overcome.

147
Just as Hassan's Prometheus represents the coalescence of perceived opposites as
necessary parts of the new whole, ontological Posthumanism functions not as an antagonistic
force against the epistemological side; rather, like Fichte's conception of the eternally striving
and limiting relationship between the Ich and Nicht-Ich, both the epistemological and
ontological trends work in concert to produce the cultural phenomenon that is the
Posthumanist discourse. I argue that this is true even if neither side would agree with this
model and both sides perpetuate arguments that undermine the very things Posthumanism is
trying to achieve.
Ontological Posthumanism is precisely what Katherine Hayles is advocating in How We
Became Posthuman. First, her title acknowledges that the phenomenon of Posthumanism is
already here, but grants that popular conceptions of Posthumanism center only on what I have
described as the epistemological trend within the larger whole. Taking an example from Hans
Moravec's Mind Children as the antithesis to, and point of departure for, her project, she writes:
If my nightmare is a culture inhabited by posthumans who regard their bodies as
fashion accessories rather than the ground of being, my dream is a version of
the posthuman that embraces the possibilities of information technologies
without being seduced by fantasies of unlimited power and disembodied
immortality, that recognizes and celebrates finitude as a condition of human
being, and that understands human life is embedded in a material world of great
complexity, one on which we depend for our continued survival. (5)
Hayles's position is deeply Heideggerian, and thus by proxy also Hölderlinian. Hayles's disdain
for what Posthumanism had become with Moravec and vision for how it could be improved
displays parallel argumentation to Friedrich Nietzsche's antagonistic relationship with Western

148
metaphysics in the late nineteenth century, and his challenge to humans to overcome
themselves.
In his 2013 book, Posthumanism, Stefan Herbrechter begins with an extended quote
from Nietzsche's “On Truth and Lie in an Extra-Moral Sense” from 1873. Herbrechter interprets
Nietzsche's point thus:
Nietzsche’s nihilistic, relativist and provocative challenge to ‘man,’ the ‘clever
animal,’ is directed against the pettiness of humanism inspired by Christian
values and his/its self-inflicted state of godlessness. … Whereas Nietzsche’s
nihilism mocks the arrogance of the human species along with its self proclaimed
anthropocentric view of ‘world history,’ some humans, inspired by the vision of a
technologically induced self-surpassing, thanks to new cogno-, bio-, nano- and
information technologies, are pushing the hubris of their species to new extremes
(2).
Even though Herbrechter is not the first to view Nietzsche as a proto-posthumanist,
Herbrechter uses Nietzsche, and particularly Nietzsche's challenge to humankind to overcome
themselves, as the basis for his “critical Posthumanism” (ibid).
While citing Nietzsche as a Posthumanist forebear, Herbrechter freely, and rightly,
acknowledges that Nietzsche would show a strong distaste for the techno-fetishism of
contemporary Posthumanism, were he alive today to witness it (2). Despite this, Nietzsche's
writings go far in providing an interpretational basis for how humans might transcend their
humanness, a theme central to Posthumanism and one that is also explored by Stefan Lorenz
Sorgner, a scholar of the parallel movement of Transhumanism. In Sorgner’s 2009 article

149
“Nietzsche, the Overhuman, and Transhumanism”104 he details the ways in which Nietzsche's
philosophy may be seen as foundational to transhumanism's goal of reaching a state of
posthumanity. Sorgner argues that Nietzsche's insistence on the need to re-evaluate all values
and overcome the elements of humanness that prevent humans from reaching their full
potential serve to ground transhumanism's own goal of achieving posthumanity through the
eradication of disease, extending human life, et cetera (30).
Both Herbrechter and Sorgner provide excellent defense for seeing Nietzsche as a
foundational figure for both Post- and Transhumanism; however, within my discursive model of
Posthumanism, Nietzsche arises as a figure firmly rooted within the ontological camp, as an
epistemological reading of him would necessarily omit the crucial materialism present in his
thought. In the prologue of Also sprach Zarathustra, Nietzsche writes, “Ich lehre euch den
Übermenschen. Der Mensch ist Etwas, das überwunden werden soll. Was habt ihr getan, ihn
zu überwinden?” (10). Nietzsche's construction of the Übermensch as a future next step in
human evolution challenges humans forth to guide themselves toward overcoming their own
innate hindrances as humans. While today's visions of posthumanity as they are understood
among the science fiction concepts of A.I., supercomputers, and cyborgs, would be, as
Herbrechter pointed out, shocking and repulsive to Nietzsche, the fact that Nietzsche's
thoughts characterize and underlie the spirit of Posthumanism is unquestionable.
As Nietzsche continues, his place as an ally to ontological proto-Posthumanism is
solidified:

104

While Sorgner's use of “overhuman” follows renowned Nietzsche scholar and translator Walter Kaufmann's use of
“overman” as a translation of Übermensch, I find “overhuman” to be clunky in English and the older translation
“superman,” or even the gender neutral “superhuman” to bring the unintended connotations of capes, spandex, and crime
fighting with it. Thus, I will treat this as a technical term within Nietzsche's philosophy and leave it untranslated.

150
Der Übermensch ist der Sinn der Erde. Euer Wille sage: der Übermensch sei der
Sinn der Erde! Ich beschwöre euch, meine Brüder, bleibt der Erde treu und
glaubt Denen nicht, welche euch von überirdischen Hoffnungen reden!
Giftmacher sind es, ob sie es wissen oder nicht. … Einst war der Frevel an Gott
der größte Frevel, aber Gott starb, und damit starben auch diese Frevelhaften.
An der Erde zu freveln ist jetzt das Furchtbarste und Eingeweide des
Unerforschlichen höher zu achten, als den Sinn der Erde! (10-11)
More than just advocating that humans transition into more advanced beings, Nietzsche
anticipates Heidegger’s fundamental ontology of Dasein as tied to the world with the
relationship between the Übermensch and the earth. While Heidegger believes humanity to be
integrally bound to the world, Nietzsche sees humanity as having forgotten this element of
existence and humanity’s reacquaintance with it only through self-overcoming. In a later
section Nietzsche incorporates the mind and soul by rejecting their metaphysical connotations.
'Leib bin ich und Seele' – so redet das Kind. Und warum sollte man nicht wie
Kinder reden? Aber der Erwachte, der Wissende sagt: Leib bin ich ganz und gar,
und Nichts außerdem; und Seele ist nur ein Wort für Etwas am Leibe. Der Leib
ist eine große Vernunft, eine Vielheit mit Einem Sinne. … Werkzeug deines
Leibes ist auch deine kleine Vernunft, mein Bruder, die du 'Geist' nennst, ein
kleines Werk- und Spielzeug deiner großen Vernunft. (33)
Nietzsche's reaction against the Western metaphysical belief that the mind or soul constitutes
a separate part of existence not only demonstrates how he sees mind, body, and earth as
being unified fundamental elements within the whole of human existence, but also continues
the ontological camp's tendency to react against the epistemological side. However, while

151
Hölderlin, Heidegger, and Hayles formulate their ontological philosophies in direct opposition to
Fichte, Husserl, and Moravec and Bukatman respectively, Nietzsche's epistemological
counterparts are in some instances individuals such as Schopenhauer and Kant, but also
include the whole of Western metaphysics and all of Christianity.
For this reason, Nietzsche functions best within the Posthumanist context as a
paradigmatic example of how the discursive Posthumanism of this work differentiates itself
from other contemporary understandings of Posthumanism. The appropriation of Nietzsche by
both Herbrechter's critical Posthumanism and Sorgner's Transhumanism at first seems to
indicate that the two understandings share more elements in common; however, further
analysis reveals that the two are approaching Nietzsche's legacy in distinctly different ways,
with Herbrechter trying to mediate between the technophillic transhumanist position and the
conservative reactions against it, and Sorgner exclusively celebrating its technophilic
interpretation. While Nietzsche is indeed easily understood as a theoretical forefather to both
posthumanist and transhumanist circles, the applicability of his work generally to these
movements does not apply to the more technical elements of transhumanism nor to
epistemological Posthumanism and is thus superficial to both movements as a whole.
Transhumanism, despite its claims to root itself within hard scientific inquiry and Enlightenment
humanism, is better understood as a movement concerned with the metaphysical questions of
consciousness and the limits of human life.
The ontology of materialism that Nietzsche can be seen as a grounding point for
Hölderlin's Romantic thinking as it is picked up by Heidegger and furthered by Hayles.
Hölderlin’s work both reacts against Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre and searches for a unity, the
One among the Many, of humans, the divine, and the earth, within his poetic understanding

152
and depictions of nature. Heidegger builds upon Hölderlin’s theme of a primordial unity, but
seeks to characterize human existence, Dasein, through a fundamental ontology and
hermeneutic exploration of language rather than poetic imagery. Hayles incorporates the
driving ideas of both Hölderlin and Heidegger, but rather than looking to poetry or
hermeneutics to find absolute Being, she attempts to reign in the popular posthumanist trends
that imagine existence beyond the human body and without the material world. 105

Romanticism
Hölderlin’s refutation of Fichte’s idealism and the subject-centered epistemology that goes
with it could not be more succinct in his short essay “Über Urtheil und Sein” from 1795. He
says simply “Wie kann ich sagen: Ich! ohne Selbstbewußtseyn?” (226). While such a pithy
question may have the effect of cutting Fichte’s philosophy off at the knees to members of the
ontological camp, Hölderlin elaborates his idea thus: “Wenn ich sage: Ich bin Ich, so ist das
Subject (Ich) und das Object (Ich) nicht so vereinigt, dass gar keine Trennung vorgenommen
werden kann, ohne, das Wesen desjenigen, was getrennt werden soll, zu verletzen; im
Gegenteil das Ich ist nur durch diese Trennung des Ichs vom Ich möglich” (ibid). Hölderlin’s
reaction against Fichte’s philosophy of identity has the goal of redirecting the focus of
philosophy off of German idealism’s subject-driven metaphysics and onto his conception of

105

The term “world” here can be somewhat tricky. Strict followers of Heidegger and Hölderlin would negate
the possibility of humans finding and attaining absolute Being, or authentic Dasein in space or on extraterrestrial
worlds. Indeed, Heidegger recalls in his interview with Der Spiegel his fear at seeing pictures of the earth from
space; however, some followers of ontological Posthumanism would accept simulated earth conditions, or
terraformed planets as substitutable for earth.

153
absolute Being,106 a state of fundamental harmony existing prior to the subject-object divide, or
Ur-teilung in Hölderlin’s words.
Hölderlin’s wordplay with “Urteilung” and “Ur-teilung” links the former’s meaning of
“judgment” with the idea of a primordial separation, that of the subject and object. By
conceptualizing Being in this way, and making a return to this unified state the sought after
goal of his poetry, Hölderlin attempts to reconcile the problem of the One and the Many that
also occupied Hassan. Similar to Hassan’s vision of Posthumanism through the symbol of
Prometheus, Hölderlin also looks to the Ancient Greeks for a figure to embody his thoughts.
Rather than choosing Prometheus, whom Goethe had recently used in his Sturm und Drang
poem in 1789, Hölderlin looks to the older titan Hyperion to embody his search for absolute
Being in his eponymous epistolary novel.
In Greek mythology, Hyperion is one of the twelve children of Gaia and Uranus, who
overthrow their parents, only to be subsequently overthrown by the Olympian gods. In the
down time between attempted revolutions, some of the children of Gaia and Uranus have
children of their own including Hyperion’s brother, Iapetus, who fathers, among others,
Prometheus. While Hassan claims that Prometheus “presages the marriage of the Earth and
Sky” (835), it is Hyperion who appears as the literal product of the marriage of Earth (Gaia)
and Sky (Uranus). Hyperion, according to myth, is the first to understand the movements and
workings of the celestial bodies and their effect on the seasons of the earth, knowledge he

106

The terms Being (capitalized in translations), absolute Being, unity, divine unity, poetic unity and divine
poetic unity are often used synonymously in Hölderlin’s works and their accompanying scholarship—a practice
which I will uphold. To further demonstrate the link between Hölderlin and Hassan, I will treat the phrase “the
One” as interchangeable with the rest.

154
gained through proto-scientific observation and which he is then tasked with distributing to
others (Siculus).
What appears in Greek myth as a generational shift from Hyperion’s birth and method of
distributing knowledge to those of Prometheus can be understood in the context of Hölderlin
and Posthumanism as the primordial separation of the fundamental unity of absolute Being.
What was whole and harmonious in Hyperion and his role as a bearer of wisdom is fractured
following the titanomachy and rise of the Olympian gods with Prometheus’ theft of Hephaestus’
fire and its delivery to humankind.
Hölderlin’s Hyperion, however, finds himself a mortal human caught between his desire to
find unity and harmony and the distance he feels between himself and the rest of the world.
Hölderlin writes:
Der liebe Vaterlandsboden gibt mir wieder Freude und Leid. … Mein ganzes
Wesen verstummt und lauscht, wenn die zarte Welle der Luft mir um die Brust
spielt. … Eines zu sein mit Allem, das ist Leben der Gottheit, das ist der Himmel
des Menschen. Eines zu sein mit Allem, was lebt, in seeliger Selbstvergessenheit
wiederzukehren in’s All der Natur, das der Gipfel der Gedanken und Freuden, das
ist der heilige Bergshöhe, der Ort der ewigen Ruhe… Auf dieser Höhe steh’ ich
oft, mein Bellarmin! Aber ein Moment des Besinnens wirft mich herab. Ich denke
nach und finde mich, wie ich zuvor war, allein, mit allen Schmerzen der
Sterblichkeit, und meines Herzens Asyl, die ewig einige Welt, ist hin; die Natur
verschließt die Arme, und ich stehe, wie ein Fremdling, vor ihr, und verstehe sie
nicht. (5f.)

155
Hyperion’s efforts to regain unity with nature through poetic reflection allow him to come close
to this Himmel des Menschen only occasionally. Every time he does come close, his attempt is
thwarted and he is once again left feeling separated and alone. Hölderlin’s Hyperion is a figure
between his mythological namesake and Prometheus. Whereas the mythological Hyperion
embodies a fully formed unity—the marriage of the Earth and Sky—and Hassan’s Prometheus
stands as a symbol of their reconnection, as well as the reconnection of other false opposites
including imagination and science, Hölderlin’s Hyperion is continually distanced from the One
into the Many. Like Prometheus, he struggles with the One and the Many, but unlike him,
Hölderlin’s Hyperion is never able to overcome the knowledge taught to him in school, which,
he says, has subsequently corrupted everything for him (9).
The theme of distancing runs throughout Hölderlin’s works like a shadow that he is
constantly trying to escape, but never can. This dichotomy of distance and unity will, in one
form or another, run through the works discussed in the Romanticism section of this chapter,
and will follow as part of Hölderlin’s influence into the work of Heidegger and Hayles. In E.T.A.
Hoffmann’s short story “Die Automata,” a mechanical fortune-telling Turk is the site of an
incident whereby the Turk demonstrates an ultra-personal knowledge of Ferdinand’s life, which
implies an intimacy with the mechanical man that shakes Ferdinand to his core. During
Ferdinand’s search for answers with his friend and confidant, Ludwig, they enter into a
discussion of Hölderlinian unity, this time experienced through music made by humans, which
stands in direct contrast to the rigid and soulless” music made by automata. Hoffmann’s
musical automata in his work represent forms near indistinguishable from those of true
humans, and at the same time, fundamentally different existences, of which the distancing
between them is repeatedly examined and manipulated by Hoffmann.

156
The theme of distancing is explored somewhat differently in Mary Shelley’s
Frankenstein. While the previous chapter examined how Frankenstein’s Creature creates his
own subjectivity, this chapter will analyze Victor’s perspective and his relationship to the One
and the Many through his formal and self-education and his understanding of natural
philosophy as he seeks the secrets of life. “Die Automata” also brings Hoffmann into both sides
of this debate as he seeks to understand how humans and machines exist differently. By
exploring each kind of being’s relationship to music, Hoffmann creates a feeling of the uncanny
by temporarily blurring the lines between human and machine through music and a
Hölderlinian quest for unity, but ultimately reestablishes the ontological distinction with the end
of Ferdinand’s story.
“Die Automata” (1819)
“Die Automata” is one of several stories included in Hoffmann’s Die Serapionsbrüder, a
collection of tales interspersed with a frame narrative of a group of literati taking turns telling
stories to the one another. While “Die Automata” has not shared the popularity and canonical
status that Der Sandmann has enjoyed, these two works, viewed together, demonstrate how
the epistemological-ontological discourse of the day is rendered through the symbolism of
artificial humans. Whereas Der Sandmann shows Fichte’s Identitätsphilosophie at work in the
mind of Nathanael as he creates a Nicht-Ich surrounding Olimpia, “Die Automata”
demonstrates how art, either in the form of the mechanical sculpture of the talking Turk or in
that of music may serve as a medium whereby individuals may access, however briefly, a state
of harmonious natural unity.

157
Hoffmann’s exploration of philosophy through the use of artificial humans takes a
different direction with “Die Automata.” In Der Sandmann, Hoffmann’s depiction of Fichte’s
three principles leads to an elaborate construction of reality showing Nathanael’s perspective
juxtaposed with the knowing and sardonic expressions of Spalanzani and Coppelius-Coppola,
the concern of Clara and Sigismund, and the ridicule of the general populous. While the
wooden figure of Olimpia does not fool anyone else into believing she is a real person,
understanding the idealized Olimpia that Nathanael sees and the resulting uncanniness
produced in the reader, as well as that produced in Nathanael toward the end of the work, as
both Nathanael’s opposite and a product of his own consciousness illustrate one take on both
the otherness of artificial humans as well as their similarity to their biological counterparts.
In “Die Automata,” Hoffmann breaks with the somewhat complicated epistemological
philosophy of Fichte and explores the comparatively straightforward ontological thought of
Hölderlin. The roles of the automata in this work only overlap on a superficial level with the role
played by Olimpia in Der Sandmann. The automata in both works serve initially as a point of
uncanny otherness, to which the protagonists must relate in some way or other. While Olimpia
becomes a living, breathing person in the mind of Nathanael, “Die Automata” does not depict
the self-positing of Ferdinand’s nascent Ich; rather, he and Ludwig must somehow reconcile
feelings of transcendence brought with the supernatural knowledge of the Turk, as well as
through music, with their own already fully formed views of the world. The feeling of
transcending one’s individuality and thereby accessing a harmonious union with nature or the
universe is at the heart of Hölderlin’s philosophy, as well as Hassan’s vision of Prometheus as
the unifier of the One and the Many.

158
In “Automata,” visitors to the Turk employ repeated efforts to understand scientifically
how the mechanism works and how the answers are produced:
Man erschöpfte sich in Vermutungen über das Medium der wunderbaren
Mitteilung, man untersuchte Wände, Nebenzimmer, Gerät, alles vergebens. Die
Figur, der Künstler waren von den Argusaugen der geschicktesten Mechaniker
umgeben, aber je mehr er sich auf diese Art bewacht merkte, desto unbefangener
war sein Betragen. Er sprach und scherzte in den entlegensten Ecken des
Zimmers mit den Zuschauern und ließ seine Figur wie ein ganz für sich
bestehendes Wesen, das irgendeiner Verbindung mit ihm nicht bedürfe, ihre
Bewegungen machen und Antworten erteilen; ja er konnte sich eines gewissen
ironischen Lächelns nicht enthalten, wenn der Dreifuß und der Tisch auf allen
Seiten herumgedreht und durchgeklopft, ja in die herabgenommene und weiter
ans Licht gebrachte Figur mit Brillen und Vergrößerungsgläsern hineingeschaut
wurde, und dann die Mechaniker versicherten, der Teufel möge aus dem
wunderlichen Räderbau klug werden. (Kapitel 31)
Despite the visitors’ best efforts, all hypotheses explaining how the Turk functions are rendered
unsubstantiable by their scientific examination. Hoffmann’s Turk is operating on a level beyond
that of the visitors’ scientific methods; one that is elucidated by Hölderlin in Hyperion:
Ach! wär ich nie in eure Schulen gegangen. Die Wissenschaft, der ich in den
Schacht hinunter folgte, von der ich, jugendlich töricht, die Bestätigung meiner
reinen Freude erwartete, die hat mir alles verdorben.

159
Ich bin bei euch so recht vernünftig geworden, habe gründlich mich unterscheiden
gelernt von dem, was mich umgibt, bin nun vereinzelt in der schönen Welt, bin so
ausgeworfen aus dem Garten der Natur, wo ich wuchs und blühte, und vertrockne
an der Mittagssonne. (Kapitel 4)
Through Hyperion, Hölderlin is lamenting how the science and logical reason taught in schools
has distanced him, and everyone else, from the possibility of accessing true divine, poetic unity
(the One), while upholding the distances and divisions between the Many.
Furthering this theme of accessing a higher unity through art, Ludwig, a musician, is
initially hesitant to see the Turk, despite it being de rigeur among the citizens of the town, on
the grounds that mechanical humans make him deeply uneasy.
»Mir sind«, sagte Ludwig, »alle solche Figuren, die dem Menschen nicht sowohl
nachgebildet sind, als das Menschliche nachäffen, diese wahren Standbilder
eines lebendigen Todes oder eines toten Lebens, im höchsten Grade zuwider.
Schon in früher Jugend lief ich weinend davon, als man mich in ein
Wachsfigurenkabinett führte, und noch kann ich kein solches Kabinett betreten,
ohne von einem unheimlichen grauenhaften Gefühl ergriffen zu werden. Mit
Macbeths Worten möchte ich rufen: ›Was starrst du mich an mit Augen ohne
Sehkraft?‹ wenn ich die stieren, toten, gläsernen Blicke all der Potentaten,
berühmten Helden und Mörder und Spitzbuben auf mich gerichtet sehe, und ich
bin überzeugt, daß die mehrsten Menschen dies unheimliche Gefühl...mit mir
teilen. . . Vollends sind mir die durch die Mechanik nachgeahmten menschlichen
Bewegungen toter Figuren sehr fatal, und ich bin überzeugt, daß euer

160
wunderbarer geistreicher Türke mit seinem Augenverdrehen, Kopfwenden und
Armerheben mich wie ein nekromantisches Ungetüm vorzüglich in schlaflosen
Nächten verfolgen würde. Ich mag deshalb nicht hingehen, und will mir lieber
alles Witzige und Scharfsinnige, was er diesem oder jenem gesagt, erzählen
lassen.« (Kapitel 31)
Ludwig’s strong reactions against waxworks exhibits, and especially their vacant, dead gazes,
at once recall Nathanael’s horror at Olimpia’s broken form as her eyes are removed during the
fight between Spalanzani and Coppola in Der Sandmann, as well as Fichte’s use of eyes as a
metaphor for the self-posited Ich and further sets Ludwig and “Die Automata” generally apart
from Husserl’s mood toward such museums. Of the Ich Fichte writes, “Das Ich ist eine
Tätigkeit, der ein Auge eingesetzt ist” (Sämtliche Werke II 249). However, in the waxworks,
Ludwig sees only a counterfeit humanity; there is no trace of the appropriation of the artificial
human as a Nicht-Ich that Nathanael did with Olimpia, nor is there the intrigue that Husserl
later described. For Ludwig, the more human-like qualities the automata are endowed with, the
more repugnant they become.
Ludwig’s experience with artificial humans, while appearing as the converse of
Nathanael and the philosophies of the epistemological camp, do not yet reflect a push toward
unity; he is still too rigidly entrenched within the Ur-teil of the subject-object divide. That is not
to say, however, that Hölderlinian unity is a foreign concept to Ludwig—he regularly
experiences just that through music—but believes that only human-made music is capable of
moving one toward transcending the Many. Hoffmann’s juxtaposition of Ludwig and
Nathanael’s positions becomes unmistakable after Ludwig and Ferdinand meet the Turk’s
alleged creator, Professor X. While discussing the captivating life force inherent in human-

161
made music, Ludwig speculates about an automaton that goes further than the musical ones
Professor X had shown them, he imagines the horror of one that might dance with a human.
Schon die Verbindung des Menschen mit toten das Menschliche in Bildung und
Bewegung nachäffenden Figuren zu gleichem Tun und Treiben hat für mich
etwas Drückendes, Unheimliches, ja Entsetzliches. Ich kann mir es denken, daß
es möglich sein müßte, Figuren vermöge eines im Innern verborgenen Getriebes
gar künstlich und behende tanzen zu lassen, auch müßten diese mit Menschen
gemeinschaftlich einen Tanz aufführen und sich in allerlei Touren wenden und
drehen, so daß der lebendige Tänzer die tote hölzerne Tänzerin faßte und sich
mit ihr schwenkte, würdest du den Anblick ohne inneres Grauen eine Minute lang
ertragen? (Kapitel 32)
This clear reference to the themes in Der Sandmann not only brings a knowing smile to the
reader, it also reaffirms Hoffmann’s philosophical motive in “Die Automata” in opposition to that
in Der Sandmann, and thus solidifies Ludwig’s position toward artificial humans and the art
they may produce.
Further, Hoffmann’s own critical interpretation of musicology shines through Ludwig as
he expresses his distaste for the entire pursuit of the mechanical mimesis of human music.
Hoffmann asserts in “Beethovens Instrumentalmusik” that the magic power of romantic music
is found not in the improvement of the medium of expression, nor in the perfection of the
instruments themselves, nor the performers alone, but rather it is within the deeper spiritual

162
recognition of the nature of music itself.107 Echoing his own earlier assertion, Hoffmann
redoubles his conviction through Ludwig:
Ist es nicht vielmehr das Gemüt, welches sich nur jener physischen Organe
bedient, um das, was in seiner tiefsten Tiefe erklungen, in das rege Leben zu
bringen, daß es andern vernehmbar ertönt und die gleichen Anklänge im Innern
erweckt, welche dann im harmonischen Widerhall dem Geist das wundervolle
Reich erschließen, aus dem jene Töne wie entzündende Strahlen
hervordrangen? (Kapitel 32)
He goes on to call Professor X’s efforts to mimic the human element of music production
through automata “der erklärte Krieg gegen das geistige Prinzip” of music generally (ibid).
Hoffmann's quest to depict a unity with absolute Being through music fits neatly into the
framework of Gesang outlined by Hölderlin. Hölderlin often uses both the terms Dichtung and
Gesang to refer to his method of accessing absolute Being as the overlaps between lyric
poetry and music are nearly self-explanatory in Romanticism. Further solidifying the
connection between music and poetry is Hölderlin's somewhat cryptic essay “Wechsel der
Töne” from 1800, in which he seeks to ground poetic composition through the grammar, so to
speak, of formal written music.
In 1795, the same year that “Über Urteil und Sein” is believed to have been written,
Christian Gottfried Körner published “Über Characterdarstellung in der Musik” in Die Hornen,
where he asserts “Das erste Erforderniß eines Kunstwerkes ist unstreitig, daß es sich als ein
menschliches Produkt durch Spuren einer ordnenden Kraft von den Wirkungen des blinden
107

Guidance on the translation of Hoffmann’s words was taken from Arthur Ware Locke’s “Beethoven’s
Instrumental Music: Translated from E. T. A. Hoffmann’s ‘Kreisleriana’ with an Introductory Note” from The
Musical Quarterly’s January 1917 issue.

163
Zufalls unterscheide; daher das Gesetz der Einheit.” Körner’s requirement that a work of art, in
this case music, must be a human product anticipates the unease and distaste expressed by
Ludwig in Hoffmann’s work. Hölderlin looks to the diatonic structure of European music to
provide a theoretical framework for how poetry might be composed. He takes three types of
poetry into account: epic, tragic, and lyric; to these he adds three Töne, or key signatures:
naive, heroic, and ideal.
As James H. Donelan points out, Hölderlin's basis in “Wechsel der Töne” is “the
dominant-tonic chord progression that defines a key” (137). This can be understood as taking
place on two levels: first in the harmonic cadence of I-V, where, for example, the tonic, or
Anfangston in Hölderlin's terms, a C moves toward the dominant chord of the scale—the
tonic’s opposite—the G. On the second level, the larger structure of the music’s key reflects
this tonic-dominant chord progression whereby the key of the piece is able to shift from C
major to G major, called a key modulation or Tonartwechsel, before ultimately resolving back
into C (ibid). This key modulation through the opposites of the tonic and dominant enriches the
music and gives the composer far more options than would otherwise be available remaining
in C for the entire piece.
Hölderlin's appropriation of this musical structure and application of it to poetry serves
first to map the transformation of the protagonist’s emotional states, and second to incorporate
Hölderlin's philosophy into the structure of his work. Regarding the application of this structure
to poetry, Donelan’s summary of Hölderlin conveys the poet’s intentions far more clearly than
the original:
An epic poem follows the course of an ideal hero realizing his heroism in action,
thereby ending the occasion for heroism; a tragic poem follows the course of a

164
naive hero into the catastrophe of death through an increased consciousness of
his own naiveté; a lyric poem reflects on itself, resolving into a naive and idealized
moment, but isolating itself from the world of action. (139)
Just as a piece of music may modulate its key based on specifically placed chord changes, so
may the subject of a poem or in the case of Hoffmann a prose text, go through many
modulating emotional states before reaching the end.
In “Die Automata,” Ludwig’s emotional position remains mostly constant throughout,
since he is a step removed from the main emotional thrust of the work. Ferdinand, in contrast,
walks Hölderlin's path of tragedy through the story’s plot. At the story’s beginning, he is eager
to go see the Turk, taking the opportunity to formulate the perfect question as a challenge to
his wit and his personal pride. While he is sympathetic to Ludwig’s misgivings about the Turk
and automata in general, he shares only the general feeling of uncanniness and light unease,
rather than Ludwig’s strong repulsion. Upon relaying his exchange with the Turk later to
Ludwig, the reader learns that Ferdinand had asked about a singing woman, whom he’d seen
only once before and with whom he had fallen immediately in love and vowed to find again one
day. Ferdinand’s question regarded his seeing her again, to which the Turk replied that he
would but it will mean his death. Shaken to his core after this interaction, Ferdinand’s Ton
changes from the heroic to the naive as both his wit and his pride are badly bruised.
Meeting the Turk’s alleged creator, Professor X, the resulting concert by his automata,
and Ferdinand’s discussion with Ludwig of mechanical versus human music all further serve to
shake Ferdinand’s understanding of reality. Finally, after being called home in a mysterious
letter by his father, Ferdinand sees the singing woman in the company of a Russian hunter and
Professor X, on her way to marry the former. Both the singer and Ferdinand faint and he never

165
sees her again, but Ferdinand does not die as the Turk had predicted. Feeling as though he
had overcome the fate the Turk had given him, Ferdinand eases into a state of happiness and
fundamental unity with the world, modulating his emotional Ton from the naive to the ideal.
On the surface, this dialectical structure moving from heroic through naive to ideal, may
appear to mirror the dialectic of Fichte’s three principles of philosophy; however, such would
be a misunderstanding of how Hölderlin's dialectics constitute themselves and subsequently
resolve. As Donelan writes:
In a series of metaphors positing and resolving the dialectical opposition between
musical sound and poetic text, Hölderlin addresses the central ontological
problem of Idealist epistemology: the division between the abstractions of
philosophy and the materiality of existence. Hölderlin resolves this division
through a concrete realization of the poetic self in metrical sound, a reconciliation
of being and judgment as a metaphorical music. (127)
While Nathanael used the automaton Olimpia as a material means to establish his Nicht-Ich
and thereby his own self-consciousness, Ferdinand is not looking to an external material object
to try and establish a necessary part of his own subjectivity. In other words, Fichte’s philosophy
seeks to cobble forces of opposition together into a new whole, whereas Hölderlin attempts to
restructure the notions of difference and distance between the two opposites, thereby resolving
them within their opposition, that is to say by making use of the elements common to both.
On a structural level, Hölderlin is attempting the difficult task of uniting the substantial
with the insubstantial in creative art. Poetry, like painting and sculpture, relies on a substantial
inspiration to form its imagery, whether it is Rilke’s Panther, Mörike’s Lampe, or nature in
general for Hölderlin. Music, on the other hand, is primarily insubstantial because it does not

166
replicate a substantial object. In other words, a poet might write a poem describing feelings of
euphoria while watching a sunset. In order to do this, the poet must explain the physical
setting, the lighting, the colors, the feelings that these images give rise to, et cetera, in order
for the reader then to be able to picture them and get a sense of the poet’s experience. A
composer may look at the same sunset and feel the same sense of euphoria but would have
difficulty rendering the colors of the sky in a comprehensible way through musical notes.
Some common ground that both poetry and music share is that they both convey
emotions extremely well. In order for music to convey the emotions desired by the composer, it
must engage with the established “grammar” rendered in keys, notes, chords, cadences and
the like as transcribed in musical notation.108 In bringing together the insubstantiality of music
and the substantive images of poetry, Hölderlin creates his Gesang, a musically structured and
driven poetry that unites the substantial and insubstantial in art. Moreover, through its musical
structure, it resolves the opposites of the tonic and dominant tones through the emotions of the
protagonist. In the case of Ferdinand, the tonic of his story would be the heroic, which then is
followed by its opposite, the naive, and finally both are resolved into the ideal ending in which
Ferdinand achieves pure happiness and is no longer consigned to the fate predicted by the
Turk.
Within Hoffmann’s substantial-insubstantial dialectic, Hölderlin further reinforces his
claim from “Über Urteil und Sein” that Being exists as a more fundamental level before the Urteil, or original judgment separating subject from object. Hölderlin believes that philosophy is
not capable of reaching the unity of subject and object that he seeks, and turns to poetry to
108

I choose the phrase “engage with” rather than “conform to” here because while composers such as
Mozart, Haydn, and Beethoven convey amazing emotions by working within the established musical rules,
Stravinsky’s The Rites of Spring breaks most of the musical guidelines and thereby produces huge emotional
reactions in the audience.

167
solve the problem, and as demonstrated previously, Hölderlin's musical version of poetry,
Gesang, is intrinsically already a unification itself. By means of his dialectical and unity-based
Gesang, Hölderlin seeks to experience and thus convey absolute Being, his inner sensation of
ecstatic unity with the rest of the world.
In addition to the larger tragic structure of Ferdinand’s life depicted in “Die Automata,”
Hoffmann makes further use of Hölderlin's Gesang and search for absolute Being in the way
he creates and organizes Ferdinand’s experiences. Ferdinand’s heroic period is fairly straight
forward, but his world changes drastically once the Turk’s response to his question shifts him
from heroic to naive. After their visit to the Turk, Ferdinand recounts the story of the singing
woman to Ludwig. While Ferdinand was on his way home to East Prussia, he spent the day on
the beach in Danzig and upon returning to his overnight accommodations, drank heavily from
the communal punch bowl. That night, after having a full day of sun, sea air, and alcohol, he
lays in his bed and overhears a man tell someone in the next room “Nun so schlafe denn wohl
und halte dich fertig zur bestimmten Stunde” (Hoffmann). Shortly thereafter, he hears a few
soft chords played on a piano to which he says:
Du weißt, Ludwig! welch ein Zauber in den Tönen der Musik liegt, wenn sie durch
die stille Nacht hallen. So war es auch jetzt, als spräche in jenen Akkorden eine
holde Geisterstimme zu mir; ich gab mich dem wohltätigen Eindruck ganz hin,
und glaubte es würde nun wohl etwas Zusammenhängendes, irgendeine
Fantasie, oder sonst ein musikalisches Stück folgen… (Ibid)

168
Ferdinand recalls that the beautiful voice of a woman accompanies the piano singing the song
“Mio ben ricordati.” This piece is credited to Franz Schubert109 and begins with the tonic and
dominant chords B flat minor (first inversion) and a modified F7 diminished,110 called an
authentic cadence, and following the oppositional pattern of tonic-dominant that Hölderlin
appropriates for his “Wechsel der Töne.” Further adhering to Hölderlin's model for poetics, “Mio
ben ricordati” adds a key modulation on top of the previous authentic cadence, modulating
from the key of B flat minor to that of B flat major,111 which marks a shift to an opposite
emotional register, and follows the lyrics from a register of tragic naiveté and death to its
opposite, one of quasi-heroic resolve by the singer to maintain her love from beyond the grave.
Importantly, through the initial chords of the piece (B flat minor, F7 diminished, D flat
6th, and F augmented—the tonic, dominant, mediant, and dominant again of the B flat minor
scale) Ferdinand feels as if a beautiful spirit voice were speaking to him through the musical
tones even before the female voice begins to sing. As if Hoffmann were allowing Ferdinand to
experience in music what Hölderlin did in nature, the spoken word and diatonic music become
one within him through the tonic and the dominant, the tension of which is thus resolved

109

“Mio ben ricordati” is the fourth of the Vier Canzonen dated 1820. The date of this piece, some six years
after Hoffmann began working on “Die Automata” and 2 years after its publication the second volume of Die
Serapionsbrüder, leaves the reader with a feeling of the uncanny that Hoffmann would surely have appreciated.
However, while Schubert is the most often credited for this work, the poem was written by Pietro Melastasio
(1698-1782) (Retzlaff 70). As Allison De Fren points out in her dissertation The Exquisite Corpse: Disarticulations
of the Artificial Female, Hoffmann and Schubert were not only acquainted but had many mutual friends, further
supporting Hoffmann’s own accurate description of Schubert’s music in the text as a sign that the former knew the
work in question before its official publication.
110
Schubert takes the dominant tone of the B flat minor scale, F, and changes it to F7 diminished to make it
match the melancholy conveyed in the lyrics. This chord, however, ordinarily includes the tonic, B, but as this
chord has just been played, including it in the F7 diminished would lessen the impact the dominant carries when it
follows the tonic.
111
While this shift may sound inconsequentially easy, the key signatures for B flat minor and B flat major
differ in that the former contains three more flats than the latter. The scales, do, however, have 4 notes in
common (B flat, C, E flat, and F), making the B flat major a natural-feeling modulation from B flat minor.

169
through the mediant112 before the repeated dominant leads into the lyrics. Ferdinand
experiences a sense of ecstatic unity as he falls asleep. An image of this mysterious singer
comes to Ferdinand in his dream, and then in the morning, rising “mechanisch,” he goes to the
window sees her leaving the hotel with an angry gentleman.
For Ferdinand, the singing woman has an existence that is both immaterial and
material. They only exchange words in his dream and the immaterial music comes to him as
though she were speaking. Her corporeal form that he sees briefly the next day solidifies for
him that the unity and ecstasy that he felt the previous night were not merely a hallucination.
The singer embodies all of Ferdinand’s desires—a paradigmatic blaue Blume—that is both the
unattainable object of his desire and his metaphysical means of accessing absolute Being, if
only fleetingly. In blurring the lines between human and automaton, Hoffmann is calling the
nature of the artist into question. The artist in “Die Automata” is not only Novalis’s Romantic
artist, nor is the only possibility that a human is the artist, as Ludwig would claim. Hoffmann’s
artist can be seen as at once Professor X, as creator of automata and the automata
themselves as producers of music that is indistinguishable from that of humans. In
restructuring the conception of the artist to include both the art of producing the mechanical
product and the art produced by the mechanical person, Hoffmann links the two in Hölderlinian
unity by resolving their opposition through their own common ground.
Like Hölderlin's musical-poetical theory, Hoffmann’s tale functions on the tension
between, and ultimate resolution of, several pairs of opposites including human/automata,
dream/waking, and soulful/mechanical music. While the fortune-telling Turk and musicians in
Professor X’s house are all clearly automata, Ferdinand is repeatedly described as moving
112

The mediant is the third note of the scale, and the second note of a standard I, III, V chord. It is
considered a standard way to resolve the tension between the tonic and dominant.

170
mechanically, as if his motions are both rigid and not completely under his control. Further, the
woman, while believed to be human from Ferdinand’s initial interaction with her, is seen at the
end of the story with Professor X, the creator of the automata, at her wedding. The Professor is
standing behind her, suggesting his role is not soon-to-be husband, but that of the father giving
his daughter away. While Ludwig rails against the possibility of automata producing real music,
the Professor is often seen as such real music is heard being sung by an unseen woman,
similar to that experienced by Ferdinand in the night.
The end of “Die Automata” finds Ferdinand waking from his fainting spell upon seeing
the woman and experiencing the most profound peace and joy he has ever felt. This
Hölderlinian unity that Ferdinand experiences is only possible through the blurring of
boundaries between the human and mechanical in Hoffmann’s construction of the woman and
Ferdinand himself, as well as the boundaries between soulful and mechanical music.
Ferdinand experiences all of this in two episodes that involve experiences both in and out of
consciousness. Crucially, the resolutions Hoffmann creates for these tensions are not
Fichtean. The do not, though their mutual exclusivity, resolve into a new whole; rather, they
follow Hölderlin's model and play off of the distances separating them as opposites to resolve
within their own opposition by making use of the elements common to both. Ferdinand’s
personal journey through the story begins with the heroic, turns to the naive, and ends with the
ideal; that is to say that the very cause of his shift from heroic to naive is lifted and is thus the
catalyst for the ideal ending of his unity with absolute Being. This ideal ending demonstrates
that Ferdinand has reached a state of absolute Being and ecstatic unity with the world, in part
because the divisions between human as subject and automaton as object, or in Hölderlin's

171
terms, the Ur-teilung, are broken down and he is able to experience the world without the
disruptive categories and distinctions that Hölderlin rails against through Hyperion.
Frankenstein (1819)
While in “Die Automata” Hoffmann presents a Hölderlinian take on the protoposthumanist discourse that runs counter to his Fichtean account in Der Sandmann, Mary
Shelley’s Frankenstein examines these two opposing sides within one text. As demonstrated in
the previous chapter, the Creature’s quest to establish an identity for himself follows Fichte’s
model of positing one’s own Ich. While the Creature’s life is characterized by struggling to
create the very basis of an individual subjectivity, Victor’s centers on the quest to find the elixir
of life and ultimately overcome death. In trying to overcome death, Victor’s hope is resurrecting
the dreams of the alchemists within the context of the post-Enlightenment world of scientific
inquiry. Victor’s complicated relationship to this scientific inquiry, and the formal education that
underpins it, is just one of a number of competing perspectives regarding institutionalized
learning housed within Shelley’s text. The contrast between Victor’s own interests in natural
philosophy and the opinions of the faculty at the University of Ingolstadt serve as just one
example of a key theme in Victor’s life: binary opposition and numerous attempts at resolution.
Victor’s education begins with the accidental discovery of a volume by Cornelius
Agrippa in the baths near Thanon (Shelley 16); however, rather than immersing himself in the
most current scientific knowledge of the day, Victor eagerly reads Agrippa, Albertus Magnus,
Paracelsus, and other alchemical writers who pursue seemingly magical goals in their
laboratories. Even Victor’s father reacts with disdain when Victor relays to him the works he’s
been reading. Undeterred, however, Victor departs for the University of Ingolstadt to continue
his studies of natural philosophy. Of the Ingolstadt faculty, Professor Krempe reacts not just

172
with disdain at Victor’s educational background as his father did, but with outright disgust
saying:
Every minute, … every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly and
entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems, and
useless names. Good God! in what desert land have you lived, where no one was
kind enough to inform you that these fancies, which you have so greedily imbibed,
are a thousand years old, and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected in
this enlightened and scientific age to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and
Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew. (Shelley 22)
Despite Krempe’s attitude toward Victor’s learning, he remains steadfast in his convictions,
saying “besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very
different, when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although
futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed” (Shelley 23). Victor’s old-school visions of
grandeur through experimentation receive a lukewarm welcome from Professor Waldmann,
but he too advises Victor to steer away from the dreams of the alchemists.
Shelley depicts several competing attitudes toward formal education with her
characters, which fall on a spectrum ranging from the completely autodidactic to the firmly
entrenched formalist. The two main autodidactic characters, Captain Saville and the Creature
both spend great deals of time conversing with Victor and, at least at first in the case of the
Creature, desire his companionship. While Victor and Clerval also begin their intellectual lives
as autodidacts, the trip to Ingolstadt made by each reflects a desire to incorporate formal
higher education into their lives. Victor relays this to Captain Saville: “I feel pleasure in dwelling
on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind, and changed its

173
bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon myself” (Shelley
16). It is in Ingolstadt that Victor meets Professor Krempe, who embodies the formalist
education of the Enlightenment, and Professor Waldman, who takes a more moderate stance
between Enlightenment science and alchemy.
In both instances with Saville and the Creature, Victor rejects the companionship each
offers after a short while in conversation. In doing so, he ultimately acknowledging that his own
intellectual course of pairing self-directed learning with the institution of the university has led
to his ruin and his inability to relate to those still in what Hölderlin would call an uncorrupted
state. It is this forced uniting of the mismatched parts of autodidacticism and institutionalized
learning through their common ground that both enabled Victor to create his Creature and
symbolizes his own education as a kind of Frankensteinian monster in itself.
In Ingolstadt Victor learns the differentiation between the alchemical masters of Magnus
and Paracelsus and the modern scientific practices of the enlightened world that is held by the
academy. Through this differentiation, he also comes to accept more fully the Ur-teilung
between himself and the natural world, leading him away from the self-driven grandeur of the
alchemical pursuits, and toward the perspective of “one who picks a flower merely in order to
learn from it,”113 as Hölderlin puts it in the Preface of Hyperion. A complete change to the
position held by Krempe would not be possible for Victor, however. While he makes use of the
scientific advancements of the post-Enlightenment age, such as the knowledge of the human
body’s inner workings, electricity, and galvanism, the knowledge and use of these
advancements are, when mixed with alchemy, at once his means of successfully

113

“und wer sie pflückt, bloß, um daran zu lernen, kennt sie auch nicht.”

174
understanding and controlling the elixir of life, and one cause of much of the elation and
melancholy in his life.
The subtitle of Shelley’s book, “A Modern Prometheus,” points the reader toward similar
connotations as Hölderlin's work, Hyperion, oder - Der Eremit in Griechenland. Shelley’s usage
of the Prometheus myth, however, only seems to be partly applicable to Victor. Rather than be
imprisoned with the other surviving Titans after the titanomachy because he did not fight Zeus
and the other gods, Prometheus is tasked with creating humans. After Prometheus forms
humans out of mud, it is Athena who breathes life into them, and Prometheus steals fire from
Hephaestus to give them knowledge and tools. Victor can indeed be easily understood as a
creator of a new race of beings, forming his Creature in his own image out of raw materials
from the grave; however, following this metaphor further would mean that Victor is also Athena
because he brings the Creature to life, or perhaps she is represented by electricity itself.
Additionally, Victor would not only have to endow his Creature with the knowledge and tools to
succeed in the world, he would also have to suffer daily torture for him out of love. While Victor
definitely suffers because of his creation, it is not willful and out of love; rather, he inflicts his
own torment upon himself making him both Prometheus and the vulture of the myth.
Where the Prometheus association begins to break down, Victor can instead be seen
as incorporating parts of Prometheus’ brother, Epimetheus, and in others, characteristics of
Hyperion, both the mythological version and Hölderlin's. Once Victor learns the secret to
bestowing life upon dead tissue, he is at first elated, but after bringing the Creature to life, he is
horrified. Where he once saw beauty in the Creature’s form and in his own work, after the
Creature awakens, Victor sees only a terrible monstrosity (Shelley 30). What Victor lacks in the
creation of his Creature is the very thing that makes Prometheus the character he is. The

175
figure of Prometheus is clever and prescient in Greek mythology; indeed, his name even
means ‘forethought.’ Victor, however, lacks forethought in the pursuit and use of his new
knowledge and is instead better described as following Epimetheus, whose name means
‘afterthought.’
In mythology Hyperion is known for observing and eventually understanding the motion
of the planets and their effects on the seasons of the earth. His task after this revelation is to
distribute the knowledge he has deduced to others (Siculus). Both Prometheus and Hyperion
are carriers of knowledge, but the key difference in the case of Victor is that Victor does not
intend to deliver any knowledge to his creation as Prometheus did, nor does he willingly and
eternally suffer for that act. The Creature inadvertently steals the jacket that contains Victor’s
journal in the pocket and thus learns in great and painful detail the story of his creation
(Shelley 88). In this respect, the Creature is responsible for his own knowledge.
Not only does Victor refuse to impart knowledge to his creation, he also refuses to relay
the details of the experiment to Captain Saville saying:
Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is
the acquirement of knowledge, and how much happier that man is who believes
his native town to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his
nature will allow. (Shelley 27)
The original zeal with which Victor began his experiments is thus revealed to be a distinct lack
of forethought on his part to anticipate how he would feel about and react to the Creature after
his creation. Victor’s burning and tormenting afterthought, however, remains consistent from
the time the Creature awakes to the novel’s end.

176
While the torment of Victor’s regret burns consistently within him after the Creature’s
creation, the shift away from excitement at the outset of the project stands as a macro example
of how Victor’s moods swing unexpectedly throughout the work. Relaying his story to Captain
Saville, Victor recounts:
No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like a
hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me ideal
bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark
world. A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and
excellent natures would owe their being to me. (Shelley 28)
Victor’s description of his motivations as being “like a hurricane” anticipate his feelings after the
Creature opens its eyes for the first time.
How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch
whom, with such infinite pains and care, I had endeavored to form? His limbs
were in proportion, and I had selected his features as beautiful. Beautiful! Great
God! (Shelley 39)
The “hurricane” that drove Victor onwards in his quest to understand the secrets of life and
death becomes a “catastrophe” as the Creature opens his eyes. The juxtaposing sides of his
mood are unified in the single symbol of the natural disaster demonstrating that, for Victor, they
represent two opposite extremes of the same emotional force.
The diametrically opposed feelings associated with the symbol of the hurricane recalls
the same imagery in Hölderlin's Hyperion. In typical fashion, Hyperion uses a single symbol for
the bipolarity of his swinging moods beginning with musings about the grandeur of nature and

177
its unity with the immortals of Antiquity and ending with his own inadequacy in the face of such
a unity.
Wo ich ging und stand, geleiteten mich die herrlichen Gestalten; wie Flammen,
verloren sich in meinem Sinne die Taten aller Zeiten in einander, und wie in ein
frohlockend Gewitter die Riesenbilder, die Wolken des Himmels sich vereinen, so
vereinten sich, so wurden Ein unendlicher Sieg in mir die hundertfältigen Siege
der Olympiaden. Wer hält das aus, wen reißt die schröckende Herrlichkeit des
Altertums nicht um, wie ein Orkan die jungen Wälder umreißt, wenn sie ihn
ergreift, wie mich, und wenn, wie mir, das Element ihm fehlt, worin er sich ein
stärkend Selbstgefühl erbeuten könnte? O mir, mir beugte die Größe der Alten,
wie ein Sturm, das Haupt, mir raffte sie die Blüte vom Gesichte, und oftmals lag
ich, wo kein Auge mich bemerkte, unter tausend Tränen da, wie eine gestürzte
Tanne, die am Bache liegt und ihre welke Krone in die Flut verbirgt. Wie gerne
hätt ich einen Augenblick aus eines großen Mannes Leben mit Blut erkauft!
(Hölderlin Kapitel 7)
Hyperion’s elation at the unity of nature with the immortals is crushed like young trees by a
hurricane at the realization of his own inability to take part in it. While Hyperion’s contextual
situation differs from that of Victor, both describe similar emotional experiences symbolized by
the hurricane.
Victor’s elation when he finally understands the secret to life is not just because he has
reached his goal; rather, it is because this understanding signals a Hölderlinian unity with
nature through the control of its forces. By endowing a dead creature with life, Victor places
himself among a pantheon of immortals who exist in a world not limited by the detrimental, and

178
ultimately superfluous, distinctions between living and dead, and subject and object. As
Hyperion exclaims to Bellarmin, “eines zu sein mit Allem, das ist das Leben der Gottheit, das
ist der Himmel des Menschen” (Hölderlin Kapitel 4). What Victor has gained in ability and unity,
however, is ultimately lost through his Epimethean lack of foresight. This macro example of
Victor’s changing moods is continued on a smaller scale throughout the novel and is, as it is
for both Hyperion and Hölderlin himself, fundamentally tied to images of nature.
The mood swings that characterize Victor’s experience in the world during his later life
are not present before he looks into the Creature’s watery yellow eyes for the first time. Of his
early life in Geneva, Victor recounts to Saville, “No youth could have passed more happily than
mine” (Shelley 16) and “I feel pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of my childhood, before
misfortune had tainted my mind, and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into
gloomy and narrow reflections upon self” (17). While Victor is clear that he attended formal
school as a child in Geneva (20) this experience is far less meaningful to him than his
independent studies in language and natural science (19-20). Upon encountering a work by
Cornelius Agrippa, he says “a new light seemed to dawn upon my mind” (16-17), but upon
relaying this new discovery to his father, the older Frankenstein quickly dismisses Agrippa and
the other alchemists as trash (17). Victor remains resolute, however, and continues his studies
of the natural philosophers and their searches for the elixir of life and the philosopher’s stone.
After trying, by his father’s urging, to attend lectures on modern science at the university
of Geneva, but failing to visit all but the last in the series for some forgotten reason, Victor’s
parents decided that he should attend the university in Ingolstadt. His departure is delayed by
a year due to his mother’s death of scarlet fever, but even this tragedy does not produce in him
more than the expected sadness. He describes his feelings as “sorrow” and “grief,” which, in

179
comparison of scale, fall short of the “misery” and “torment” he uses to describe his life after
bringing the Creature to life.
Victor recounts how the summer passed as he was engaged in his pursuit. “It was a
most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest, or the vines yield a
more luxuriant vintage; but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature” (Shelley 29).
Victor’s ability to describe the summer, however, gives a clue that it did not pass him by
completely. He did not venture out of his laboratory, but the season outside reflected his inner
emotional state. The hurricane that drove him onward was not yet the force of destruction it
would become; rather, it was an ecstasy at the grandeur of his findings and his own unity with
the forces of nature. As the summer turns to autumn, however, Victor begins to be possessed
by a strong anxiety (30) and Shelley’s imagery recalls that of Hölderlin. In a letter to Bellarmin,
Hyperion writes:
Der Sommer war nun bald zu Ende; ich fühlte schon die düstern Regentage und
das Pfeifen der Winde und Tosen der Wetterbäche zum voraus, und die
Natur…stand jetzt schon da vor meinem verdüsterten Sinne, schwindend und
verschlossen und in sich gekehrt, wie ich selber. (Kapitel 9)
Paralleling the relationship between Hyperion and nature, Victor’s growing anxiety culminates,
predictably, with the night of the Creature’s awakening, which he describes as a “dreary night
of November” (30).
This correlation between Victor’s emotional state and nature is furthered after the
Creature kills Victor’s youngest brother, William, and his cousin, Justine, is convicted of the
crime and sentenced to death. Justine’s death weighs much more heavily on Victor and he is
relieved once they are able to leave Geneva for Belrive. Victor describes feeling freed by this

180
move as his time in nature is not confined by the closing of city walls (Shelley 57). Victor
spends his nights on a lake, often allowing the wind to blow him along its own course, and
ruminates on his own misery. He says “I was often tempted, when all was at peace around
me…to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my calamities
forever” (58). After a family outing into the mountains, Victor slowly comes out of his
depression to such a degree that he desires to return alone to experience the beauty of nature.
While this does help his mood for a short time, the next day came with heavy rain and mists,
and brought with them his depression (61).
Victor’s moods are both reflective, and at the mercy, of his natural surroundings. After
bringing his Creature to life, his main state is being depressed, but he is able to transcend this
through contact, sometimes extended contact, with nature. The more awe-inspiring the natural
phenomenon, the greater the effect on Victor’s psyche. Hyperion’s relationship with nature is
similar, but marked by the constant knowledge that any ecstasy and unity he experiences will
be short lived.
Despite this omnipresent inability to maintain access to the unity of absolute Being,
Hyperion ends with the contented musings of the title character in a final letter to Bellarmine.
He recognizes and accepts the dissonances and strife of the world ending with “‘es scheiden
und kehren im Herzen die Adern und einiges, ewiges, glühendes Leben ist Alles.’ So dacht ich.
Nächstens mehr.” (Kapitel 68). Hyperion has come to terms with the pain of being separated
from Nature and Being, realizing that both separation and unity are temporary conditions for
living beings.
The ending of Frankenstein, however, does not end with Victor’s acceptance of his
situation. He is, until his death, burdened by the life and actions of the Creature to whom he

181
gave life. Victor is unable to achieve the inner peace that Hyperion does; rather, his demise
follows the ending of Hölderlin's poem “Hyperions Schicksalslied”
Doch uns ist gegeben,
Auf keiner Stätte zu ruhn,
Es schwinden, es fallen
Die leidenden Menschen
Blindlings von einer
Stunde zur andern,
Wie Wasser von Klippe
Zu Klippe geworfen,
Jahr lang ins Ungewisse hinab.
Victor’s sufferings haunt him until his final breath. Rather than acknowledging the unity of both
ecstasy and suffering, he lives it. While he is never able to rectify his perceived transgressions
against humankind by creating his Creature, this is contrasted with the friendship he builds
with Captain Saville in his final days. Even if Victor does not find peace at the end of his life,
his Creature’s words to Saville may well speak for his creator as well. “‘but soon,’ he [the
Creature] cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, ‘I shall die, and what I now feel be no longer
felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct” (Shelley 162). What Hyperion is able to find in
life, Victor, and incidentally also Victor’s Creature, can only find in death.

Modern and Contemporary Ontological Posthumanism
While it is relatively simple to delineate between what defines a work as Romantic
versus Posthumanist when tracing the latter movements roots, discerning a distinction
between a Modernist period and a Posthumanist period is much more difficult. The focus of the

182
Romantic period lies in the temporary attainment by the individual of access to a level of
ontological unity within existence where all natural beings once again become part of the
greater and harmonious whole of nature. The unity between natural beings and the art that
provides the conduit for humans to attain it, is, of course, foreign to mechanical beings, no
matter how realistically human they may seem.
With Heidegger’s Sein und Zeit, however, the driving theme of ontological existence
shifts away from Hölderlin's constant striving to attain Absolute Being in favor of exploring in
greater detail the kind of Being that humans have, namely Dasein in opposition to that of other
kinds of entities in the world. As I have already argued, Katherine Hayles's How We Became
Posthuman marks the resurgence of the ontological arguments against the epistemological in
the wake of Hassan’s vision of Promethean unity; however, Hayles remains so faithful to
Heidegger’s philosophy that marking a distinction between a Modernist and contemporary
version on a theoretical level is all but impossible. Hayles's primary achievement in her book is
to recontextualize Heidegger’s fundamental ontology within the technological context of the
millennial shift.
Even though Hayles's book stands as the defining work of ontological Posthumanism,
the ideas she conveys had recently been explored through the figure of Dr. Katherine Pulaski
in Star Trek: The Next Generation, whom Roddenberry openly based on Dr. Leonard McCoy
from The Original Series. Leonard “Bones” McCoy (DeForest Kelley), while playing the original
Enterprise’s doctor, had a running antagonistic relationship with Spock (Leonard Nimoy)
because he was not human. Serving to call attention to the Southern doctor’s casual racism
(McCoy is from Georgia), which is starkly juxtaposed with the defining concept of the
Enterprise’s bridge, conceived of as “Starship Earth” by Roddenberry, McCoy’s derogatory

183
references to Spock’s pointy ears, green blood, and cool logical demeanor underscore the
divide between the Vulcans and the red blooded and passionate humans. To McCoy, it seems
that Spock is little more than a living robot, but instances where Spock’s life is in danger (TOS:
“Spock’s Brain” and others) reveal that McCoy does truly care for the Vulcan, but he is unable
to reconcile for himself the disparate existences, and thus ontologies, of Vulcans and humans.
Pulaski (Diana Muldaur) arrived on the Enterprise in the second season of The Next
Generation to replace Dr. Crusher (Gates McFadden); however, her relationship with
nonhuman aliens is not what McCoy’s was with Spock. Rather, Pulaski’s antagonisms are
directed at the android Data (Brent Spiner), whom she regards as mere machine, and thus
less than human, due to her role as doctor in the care of biological beings (Westbrook 1).
The ninth episode of TNG’s second season, “The Measure of a Man” (written by
Melinda M Snodgrass) brings the question of Data’s personhood to the fore. A Starfleet
cyberneticist, Commander Bruce Maddox (Brian Brophy) has requested to have Data
transferred to his command so that Maddox may disassemble him to learn more about Soongtype androids, since, he argues, Data is not a sentient life form.114 Data argues against this
procedure and his status as a nonperson saying to Captain Picard “Sir, Lieutenant La Forge’s
eyes are far superior to human biological eyes, true? Then why are not all human officers
required to have their eyes replaced with cybernetic implants?” Receiving no verbal answer
from Picard, Data says “I see. It is precisely because I am not human.” Data’s argument not
only supports his case that he is a sentient being and should be afforded all rights of
personhood, it also recalls the trope of eyes being as a symbol for human subjectivity from

114

Data was created by Dr. Noonian Soong, who also created Lore. All three characters were played by
Brent Spiner.

184
epistemological Posthumanism. Ultimately Data’s personhood status is put on trial and
defended by Captain Picard and prosecuted by a reluctant Commander William Riker. To
prove that Data is only a machine, and ontologically other from humans, Riker removes Data’s
hand for inspection by the Judge. Following this, Riker flips Data’s power switch and says
“Pinocchio is broken. Its strings have been cut.” Picard’s response, after a recess, is to say
that “Commander Data is a machine. … We too are machines, just machines of a different
type.” While the court ultimately rules in favor of Data’s personhood, both Picard and Riker
have spotlighted the ontological otherness embodied by Data. While he may be self-aware and
deserving of personhood rights, he is not human.
Data’s existence, and indeed the viewer’s interest in him as a character, is
characterized by his machine ontology and how that separates him from truly human existence
as he constantly strives for the latter. While Data never fully realizes his dream of becoming
human, other artificial humans with similar desires are not relegated to the same fate. The
Cylons in Battlestar Galactica (2004) present an intriguing case of bridging the ontological
chasm between biological and machine organisms. While the original 1978 series lays a
foundation of disparity between the humans and Cylons, the backstory of the Cybernetic
Lifeform Nodes is reimagined in the Battlestar reboot and Caprica to complicate the ontologies
that serve to drive the conflict of the series. The ontological difference between humans and
artificially intelligent creations is explored further in Spike Jonze’s film Her (2015), which takes
the theme of human-machine love that is brought up in Battlestar Galactica and examines it on
a more personal level.

185
Battlestar Galactica Universe (1978-2013)
The stories within the Battlestar Galactica universe depict the conflicts surrounding and
between the human population, which is spread over twelve colonies on twelve worlds, and the
Cylons, artificial beings who serve as the recurring antagonists and ontological foil for human
biological existence. While the nature and origin of the later iterations of the Cylons differ from
those of the original series (1978-1979), the driving source of conflict between Cylons and
humans remains that they represent fundamentally differing kinds of existences. The original
series’ intro sequence contains a voiceover by Patrick Macnee, who also voiced the Cylons’
Imperious Leader, that outlines the ontological bond shared by all humans:
There are those who believe that life here began out there, far across the
Universe with tribes of humans who may have been the forefathers of the
Egyptians or the Toltecs or the Mayans that they may have been the architects of
the Great Pyramids or the lost civilizations of Lemuria or Atlantis. Some believe
that there may yet be brothers of man who even now fight to survive--somewhere
beyond the heavens! (BSGos)
Macnee seems to go out of his way not to mention the Ancient Greeks, after whom numerous
characters, worlds, and deities within the show are named; however, the shared human
ontology depicted here is further fleshed out in a conversation between President Adar of the
Council of Twelve and Commander Adama. In response to Adar’s claim that the Cylons want
peace, Adama says: “Forgive me, Mr. President, but they hate us with every fiber of their
existence. We love freedom, and we love independence--to feel, to question, to resist

186
oppression. To them it’s an alien way of existing they will never accept” (BSGos: “Saga of a
Star World”).115
The Cylons, it is reported in the first episode, were the mechanical creations of a longdead reptilian race, also called Cylons, from the planet Cylon. Their conflict with humans arises
after the humans’ attempt to intervene in the Cylon’s enslavement of neighboring biological
races. In the wake of years of war, the humans are betrayed to the Cylons by Count Baltar,
and the remnants of the human population must leave their homeworlds to stay alive. Adama
decides to search for the fabled lost thirteenth colony on a distant planet called Earth.
While the rebooted Battlestar Galactica series (BSGr),116 preserves many of the basic
plot elements from the original, the origins of the Cylons has changed. The opening sequence
of BSGr announces that “The Cylons were created by man. They evolved. They rebelled.
There are many copies. And they have a plan.” BSGr, along with Caprica and Blood and
Chrome base themselves on a much more complicated Cylon origin story. As depicted in
Caprica, the Cylons were created as military defense robots by Daniel Graystone of Graystone
Industries. Graystone’s daughter, Zoe, is killed in the first episode in a terrorist attack by the
monotheist cult The Soldiers of the One (STO),117 which brings the monotheistic versus
polytheistic conflict from BSGr directly into the Cylon origin story (Caprica: “Pilot”).
Zoe was a brilliant computer programmer and before her death had made a virtual copy
of herself to exist in V-World, a shared virtual reality experience where most everyone in the
115

The conflict between the humans and Cylons can also be understood as a symbol for the Cold War, as
fleshed out in the volume Battlestar Galactica and International Relations edited by Nicholas J Kiersey and Iver B
Neumann
116
In order to keep the names straight, I will use BSGr for the rebooted series (2003-2009), BSGos for the
original 1978-1979 series, and BSG to refer to the universe or franchise generally.
117
Polytheism is the state religion of the Twelve Colonies, which forms itself out of a mix of Greek and
Roman deities.

187
Twelve Colonies spends their free time. After Zoe’s death, Daniel Graystone learns of Zoe’s
copy and tracks her down. After stealing a rival company’s “meta-cognitive processor” for his
Cylon, the virtual Zoe, with the help of a friend, transfers her consciousness from V-World into
the Cylon’s meta-cognitive processor, becoming the first self-aware Cylon (Caprica: “Pilot”) .
Greystone’s other Cylons are used as servants and for defense, but soon evolve rudimentary
self-consciousness and many come under the influence of STO leader Clarice Willow, who
preaches to them about their equal status with humans. Simultaneously, Daniel Graystone and
his wife, Amanda, work to create a human-looking body for Zoe’s avatar and the resurrection
technology to produce it, which becomes the first “skinjob” (Caprica: “Apotheosis”)
The Cylons, after developing self-awareness, revolt due to their treatment as slaves
resulting in the First Cylon War. After more than a decade of war, the Cylons suddenly agree
to an armistice and disappear. It is revealed that in the last days of the war, the Final Five
reached the Cylons and negotiated for them to end the conflict and in return the Five gave
them biological bodies and resurrection technology. These Five are the only survivors of
earlier, and previously unknown, biomechanical Cylons, the original Thirteenth Tribe, who
existed thousands of years before Graystone created his models, and fled Earth after a
nuclear holocaust wiped out the human and Cylon populations. They had hoped to reach
Caprica before the cycle began again in an effort to foster better understanding between the
humans and Cylons, but because the Final Five lacked faster than light (FTL) travel, they
arrived after the war had already begun. At the beginning of BSGr, no one had heard from the
Cylons for forty years, but they returned with both biological (skin jobs) and mechanical models
(centurions, or “toasters” to the humans) to attack the Colonies and attempt to exterminate the
humans (BSGr: “Sometimes a Great Nation”).

188
Through the ontological conflict between biological and synthetic life in BSGr, humans
are not only in danger of extinction at the hands of their cybernetic creations, they are
displaced from their homeworlds and forced to take refuge in a small fleet of starships. On the
surface this seems only to add insult to injury, but taken in a context of Heideggerian
fundamental ontology, being driven from their homeworlds by the Cylons constitutes not just a
threat to human life, but a threat to the way humans exist as living beings, and thus the very
core of human ontology. Heidegger’s conception of human existence, Dasein, is “ferner
Seiendes, das je ich selbst bin” (Sein 53). Dasein, Heidegger continues, must be understood a
priori as having always already been situated within the spatio-temporal context of the physical
world. He labels this indivisible relationship between people and their physical existences in
the context of the world as being-in-the-world (ibid). He writes “Der zusammengesetzte
Ausdruck »In-der-Welt-sein« zeigt schon in seiner Prägung an, dass mit ihm ein einheitliches
Phänomen gemeint ist” (ibid).
This kind of being-in is not simply intended to mean that humans are located in a world
the way water is in a glass. Rather, Heidegger traces the meaning of the word “in” from the
contemporary spatial relation to the Latin “innan-,” meaning to live, and “habitare” (to dwell).
He continues his linguistic gymnastics to link “bin” with the preposition “bei” and conclude that
“Ich bin” does not just mean “I am,” but “ich wohne, halte mich auf bei . . . der Welt, als dem so
und so Vertrauen” (Sein 54). For Heidegger, to be-in-the-world for humans carries the meaning
to taking care of, and being unable to be conceptualized apart from.
While Heidegger does not speak heavily about humans and space travel, he does
remark in his interview with Der Spiegel “Nur ein Gott kann uns retten” on having seen
photographs of the earth taken from the moon. His reaction is one of fear because “the

189
uprooting of humanity has already begun” (208). Part of the uprooting of humanity Heidegger
is referring to is the technological view of beings and the world that humanity is adopting, for
which the Cylons in BSGr stand as a cautionary tale and one which I will discuss in detail later.
The uprooting of the human population from the Colonies by the Cylons constitutes an
attack on the humans’ being-in-the-world, an angle that the Cylons continue throughout the
initial episodes of BSGr. The Cylons make heavy use of nuclear weapons against the
colonists, both on Caprica and other worlds, as well as during battles in space. While the
humans are susceptible to the effects of radiation, the mechanical Cylons are not and the
biomechanical less so. Further, the episode “33” revolves around persistent Cylon attacks
every thirty-three minutes. The fleet is continuously able to make FTL jumps to escape, but the
effect is at once to reinforce the distance between the humans and the wake/sleep cycle that
coincides with planetary day and night, and to prevent the humans from resting, which both
underscores the ontological difference between Cylon and human and attacks the humans’
morale and will to fight. The subsequent episode involves an attack by a Cylon skinjob sleeper
agent against the Galactica’s water supply, forcing the humans to seek out a celestial body in
order to reacquire the materials they need to sustain themselves.
These continual attacks against Dasein’s (i.e. the humans’) being-in-the-world follow the
President, Laura Roslin, learning that she has terminal cancer (BSGr: “Miniseries”). As as
leader for the Colonists and a symbolic reflection of the people she represents, Roslin is
suddenly put in a place where she must face her own mortality, both from the Cylon threat and
from her own cancer. Just like Roslin, the human population faces threats internal and external
with the knowledge that Cylons can now look just like humans slowly making its way around

190
Galactica. The effect of this is that Roslin, as a symbol for the rest of the people, adopts the
Heideggerian mode of being-toward-death.
Heidegger is very careful to distinguish between death as one’s own possibility of nolonger-being-able-to-be-there and the death of others that Dasein experiences second hand.
Of the latter Heidegger writes:
Je angemessener das Nichtmehrdasein des Verstorbenen phänomenal gefasst
wird, um so deutlicher, zeigt sich, dass solches Mitsein mit dem Toten gerade
nicht das eigentliche Zuendegekommensein des Verstorbenen erfährt. Der Tod
enthüllt sich zwar als Verlust, aber mehr als solcher, den die Verbleibenden
erfahren. Im Erleiden des Verlustes wird jedoch nicht der Seinsverlust als solcher
zugänglich, den der Sterbende »erleidet«. Wir erfahren nicht in genuinen Sinne
das Sterben der Anderen, sondern sind höchstens immer nur »dabei«. (Sein 239)
Roslin’s relatively protected position on the ship Colonial One means that she is less likely
than other members of the fleet, specifically Galactica’s pilots and crew and the defenseless
civilian ships, to come face to face with her own death. Safety for the fleet is only ever one FTL
jump away, so long as the danger comes from Cylon Basestars. With it known that Cylons are
now capable of creating biological bodies, every member of the fleet becomes acutely aware
that every stranger they see may be a Cylon agent readying to commit an act of terror.
Death, for Heidegger and for Roslin, is no longer simply the possibility of someone else
no longer being physically present. When Dasein accepts the inevitability of its own death, the
individual may thus begin to live authentically. Of one’s own death, Heidegger writes, “Als
Seinkönnen vermag das Dasein die Möglichkeit des Todes nicht zu überholen. Der Tod ist die

191
Möglichkeit der schlechthinnigen Daseinsunmöglichkeit. So enthüllt sich der Tod als die
eigenste, unbezügliche, unüberholbare Möglichkeit (Sein 250). Most importantly, this beingtoward-death that Roslin exhibits is not marked by her fear of the Cylons or her cancer,
although the acceptance of both is a process for her. She recoils from neither threat; rather,
she accepts the challenge and risks placed before her as her own and, (eventually) together
with Commander Adama, moves the fleet toward finding a new planet to settle on, namely
Earth.
A counterpoint to the authentic Dasein and being-toward-death experience by the
humans is the relationship between the Soldiers of the One (STO) in Caprica and subsequent
mechanical and biological Cylons. The STO is a monotheistic terrorist organization headed by
Clarice Willow who take advantage of the widely popular V-World virtual reality system created
by Graystone Industries. Once the existence of Zoe Graystone’s V-World copy is realized by
the STO, Willow and other leaders make the case for apotheosis, or the copying of living
beings, similar to the process outlined by Hans Moravec in Mind Children, so that their copies
may live on after the original’s biological death. Because of the STO’s focus on posthumous
divine redemption and entrance into this virtual heaven, they market this possibility as both the
promised paradise and life everlasting in a separate version of V-World (Caprica:
“Apotheosis”).
Death for the STO, and later for the Cylons at large, thus becomes simply a matter of no
longer being there, rather than an ontological and existential finality of life. Moreover in BSGr,
because Cylon consciousness is housed in databases and downloaded into individual bodies,
so long as there is a resurrection ship nearby, consciousness is re-uploaded into the Cylon

192
mainframe upon bodily death, and is then ready to be placed into a new body. 118 The only
possibility for true, human-style death is for the resurrection ship to be too far away to receive
the Cylon’s consciousness or to be infected with a particular virus (“Torn”).119 Then, and only
then, do the individual Cylon’s memories, experiences, knowledge, and personal identity die
with the body. Because this possibility of true death only arises in rare circumstances, Cylons
do not exist in a state in which they must come to terms with the Angst surrounding, and
certainty of, their own death and thus lack this crucial tenet of human Dasein.
For the Cylons, each body their consciousness inhabits constitutes a mere physical
prosthesis for the mind. Just as Hayles feared in the opening pages of How We Became
Posthuman, the Cylons have achieved, and also constitute, a posthuman existence based in
epistemological conceptions of life. Humans, however, are bound by their biological ontologies.
The only cross-over point between ontological and epistemological Posthumanism comes in
the form of Zoe’s creation of her own copy, which serves to alleviate the pain felt by her
parents only in part. The division between the real world and V-World is so stark that
Graystone creates resurrection technology to give the virtual Zoe a new human body, thus
paving the way for the human-looking Cylons that drive the plot of BSGr. These too, however,
while looking human and being programmed to think they are human, are mere facsimiles
when examined more closely. Those humans on Galactica who believe they are human are
the closest Cylons come to actually achieving humanness. Even if they achieve the authentic
being-toward-death that underlies Dasein, it is a façade because their true nature is hidden
even from them.
118
119

This theme is echoed by the Geth in the Mass Effect Trilogy.
An essay examining Cylons and death from a Heideggerian perspective called “When the Non-Human
Knows its Own Death” by Brien Willems can be found in Battlestar Galactica and Philosophy.

193
Because the Cylons only view their bodies as prostheses, they, especially the skinjobs,
propagate a similar view as the humans against the mechanical Cylon centurions, namely a
technological one. In the BSGr timeline, humans built the Cylons to serve as a defense force
and for hard labor. They were, in Heidegger’s terminology, mere equipment (Zeug). As
Heidegger outlines, the being of such objects (das Zuhandene), is contained not in the object
in isolation, but within the object itself and in the context in which it was intended to be used
(Sein 70). Heidegger’s example of the hammer’s being existing within the realm of carpentry
and for people with grasping hands serves as an analogy for the Cylons as well. The Cylons
were created for a context of defense and labor in a decadent and capitalistic world that exists
on one level on the physical earth and on another in the virtual V-World. Further, following the
path of Victor Frankenstein, the first Cylons were created bearing humanoid shape, albeit
significantly larger than the average human, so as not to diverge too far from the contextual
world known to their human creators.
Before the Cylons gain consciousness, understanding them as Zeug is only natural.
They are tools programmed to complete the actions desired by their creators. However, with
the development of a self-conscious awareness, the Cylons become more than equipment for
their human overlords. While they do develop self-awareness and reflexivity, the Cylons lack
the possibility of an authentic being-toward-death of the humans. Moreover, as the Cylon
raiders (small, fighter-style starships) and Basestars are themselves Cylons and not ships
piloted by them, Cylon being, as a whole, is not necessarily predicated upon being-in-the-world
as human existence is. Thus the Cylons transform themselves from world-poor beings
designed for work into world-forming beings similar to humans (Metaphysics 177).

194
Even though Cylons, with their original development of self awareness, no longer fit the
qualifications to be understood as mere equipment nor as world-poor, these emergent qualities
are not fully recognized by the humans, and the Cylons continue to be treated as machines.
Humanity was presented with the possibility of coexisting with the Cylons, but in order to do so,
the humans would have had to have respected the self-awareness and ability to self-improve
that the Cylons possessed from the time it emerged. Instead, the humans viewed the Cylons
as mere standing reserve, that is to say, a possible means to the humans’ own end (Heidegger
“Technik” 16).
In his essay Die Frage nach der Technik Heidegger poses himself the question “Was ist
die moderne Technik? (15). Modern technology, he answers, is a revealing that exists as a
challenging, rather than as a bringing-forth. Technology in the sense of bringing-forth is
technology such as a windmill, which blows freely in the wind to take advantage of the energy
it offers, whereas modern technology seeks to store the gained energy for other uses. He
writes:
Ein Landstrich wird dagegen in die Förderung von Kohle und Erzen
herausgefordert. Das Erdreich entbirgt sich jetzt als Kohlenrevier, der Boden als
Erzlagerstätte. Anders erscheint das Feld, das der Bauer vormals bestellte, wobei
bestellen noch hieß: hegen und pflegen. … Es stellt sie im Sinne der
Herausforderung. Ackerbau ist jetzt motorisierte Ernährungsindustrie. Die Luft
wird auf die Abgabe von Stickstoff hin gestellt, der Boden auf Erze, das Erz z.B.
auf Uran, dieses auf Atomenergie, die zur Zerstörung oder friedlichen Nutzung
entbunden werden kann. (“Technik” 15-16)

195
Modern technology thus seeks to make use of a means for an end that is not immediately
present and is not necessarily connected to either the harnessed means or the creative
technological way of that the means is rerouted and changed.
In order to create the first Cylon, Daniel Graystone first had to hold a technological view
of the world, that is to say one of the world, and all of its resources, as a means to the end that
he created. The ultimate expression of this on Caprica is V-World, which not only harnesses
great amounts of energy to power and produce, but also gives the virtual world and everyone’s
avatars the state of standing reserve. Standing reserve, for Heidegger, is the state of
everything that is always ready to hand for the purposes of being ready to be pressed into
some other action (“Technik” 17). Avatars are used by their creators as standing reserve to
experience various things in the virtual world including sex, torture, role playing, and even
death. Zoe Graystone takes this one step further by creating a virtual self that is a copy of her
consciousness within V-World. Zoe has thus taken a technological view of herself in creating
another self-aware Zoe to serve as standing reserve for the real Zoe’s own ends.
Zoe’s digital copy of herself and the subsequent self-aware Cylons indicate Heidegger’s
driving point in making the distinction between modern technology and the kind of bringingforth technology that does not seek to apply new, foreign ends to technological means. Namely
that through the creation of advanced technology, humans begin to see the world, other
humans, and even themselves through the lens of “enframing.” This technological view
reduces the world and all bodies in it to standing reserve, which fundamentally removes
humans from their natural, harmonious relationship with, and in, the world. The Twelve
Colonies’ resources are, when enframed this way, simply there to be used for technological

196
innovation.120 Cylons are there to be used as workers and defense forces, despite their levels
of intelligence. After the Cylon attack, newly found worlds are little more than means to
replenish the fleet’s resources.
The final episodes of BSGr features four of the Final Five Cylon models (Tory, Tigh,
Anders, and Tyrol) fixated on Bob Dylan’s song “All Along the Watchtower.” At first, they each
only have pieces of the melody, to which they then add lyrics, but it is not until they all
simultaneously feel compelled, through the music, to meet in a secluded room that they are
able to piece together the whole song. This completion of the piece is the trigger they needed
to reactivate the knowledge that they are not only Cylons, but the descendants of the original
Thirteenth Tribe, once thought to be human and later learned to be Cylon, that settled the
original Earth (“Crossroads Part II,” “Sometimes a Great Nation”).
It is then revealed that Anders had written the song in a past life on Earth, where he and
the other Final Five had worked to reinvent resurrection technology and organic memory
transfer, the latter of which had come from Kobol in the time before the Colonies, and both of
which had fallen out of use due to the Cylons’ ability to reproduce biologically. The Final Five
are the last representatives from the biological Cylons after their mechanical creations, Cylon
centurions who gained self-awareness, were mistreated and rebelled leading to a nuclear
holocaust on the planet. It is these five who upload themselves, along with the possibility of
creating copies of their biological bodies, to a ship in orbit above Earth and set out to make
contact with the other Twelve Tribes of Kobol in order to prevent them from mistreating their
creations and suffering the same fate.

120

This even comes out in derogatory terms for colonists of Tauron, Dirt Eaters, because Tauron is less
affluent and technologically-driven than Caprica.

197
Dylan’s song serves at once as a lyrical means of conveying the cyclical nature of time
in the BSG universe, as well as the desire to escape the cycle, and also as a link from the time
on Earth before the Cylon war to the present.121 The song continues after the surviving
colonists land on the new Earth with Hera, the first living human-Cylon hybrid produced
through sexual reproduction, in a montage depicting the course of the civilization that is
created on the new planet. The series ends with both the realization that Hera is the genetic
mother of all present day humans, meaning that everyone alive today is a human-Cylon hybrid.
The cyclical nature of time in BSG combined with the direction of the plot of BSGr
recalls Nietzsche’s doctrine of eternal return. In BSGr a small number of humans escape
destruction at the hands of the Cylons only to produce hybrid offspring and then settle a new
Earth where the technology inevitably advances to the point of building robots and the cycle is
slated to begin anew. Eternal return, which Nietzsche first brings up in Die fröhliche
Wissenschaft, in a section titled “Das größte Schwergewicht,” asserts that every event has
already happened an infinite number of times in the past and will happen an infinite number of
times in the future. Upon learning this, one’s reaction conveys the quality of life one has led,
and as Nietzsche will later elaborate, how far a person is on the path to Übermensch
(Nietzsche Fröhliche).
While the Cylons accept eternal return, humans have much more difficulty with the
concept, in part because the Final Five have lived through the cycle once before and its truth is
not in question, and in part because it is the humans in this cycle whose actions lead to the
121

“There must be some kind of way out of here said the Joker to the Thief/ … There are many here among
us who feel that life is but a joke/But you and I, we’ve been through that, and this is not our fate.” My interpretation
of the use of this song is to convey the feeling of being trapped in an inevitable cycle of destruction, similar to that
in the Mass Effect Trilogy, but with the caveat that both the destruction and the possibility of escape from the
cycle are always the responsibility of the people themselves.

198
rebellion and wars. Eternal return, for Nietzsche is bound to the process of overcoming one’s
humanness in the transition to Übermensch (Zarathustra 14-16).
The final stage before overcoming the human is the last man, which is symbolized and
embodied in Karl Agathon, call sign Helo, in BSGr. Helo shares symbolism in his name with
Nietzsche’s prophet of the Übermensch. Helo is Greek for sun, and the Greek (as well as
English) name for Zarathustra is Zoroaster, meaning “undiluted star.” Further, Helo’s surname,
Agathon, is shared with a Greek tragic poet, whose thought is only through quotes in the work
of others. In the Nicomachean Ethics, for example, Aristotle quotes Agathon as saying “Of this
one thing is even god deprived, to make what has been done not to have happened,” which
underscores the supremacy of eternal return within the BSGr universe (103).
Helo stands as an ideal embodiment of both this quote and Nietzsche’s doctrine of the
last man. In an act of selflessness, Helo gives up his seat on the last departing Raptor 122 from
Caprica to Gaius Baltar, the man who is widely thought to understand the Cylons the best and
is in actuality being controlled by a hallucination of Cylon number six. After a number of days
on Caprica, his life is saved by a copy of Boomer, the pilot of his Raptor, who is actually a
model number eight Cylon. She lies to him and makes him fall in love with her, whereupon she
seduces him and they conceive a Cylon-human hybrid child, who will become Hera, the only
viable hybrid offspring produced by the two species. Once Helo realizes he has been tricked
and that the number eight is not Boomer, she is already pregnant and he is unable to bring
himself to kill her. Agathon’s quote in Helo’s context demonstrates his powerlessness to
change his past actions, which result in his being ostracised by the Galactica’s crew upon his
return.
122

The Raptor is an FTL capable small spacecraft similar in design and purpose to a helicopter.

199
While Helo’s role brings him eventually to a happy end, the last man in Nietzsche’s view
is the most contemptible existence a person can have, which accurately describes the other
humans’ view of him in the time between his return to Galactica and settlement on Earth
(Zarathustra 14, BSGr: “Flight of the Phoenix”). Helo represents Nietzsche’s last man, both
literally and symbolically, as his human-Cylon daughter, Hera, is found to be a common
ancestor of all humans on Earth. These “humans,” unbeknownst to them, are thus also part
Cylon. Once Helo learns that the Cylon who comes to be known as Athena is pregnant, his
perspective on, and role in, the battle against the Cylons changes. He becomes an advocate
against their dehumanization at the hands of the humans, and seeks to find peaceful
compromise. While this approach is ultimately fruitful for him in that he is able to settle with
Athena and Hera on the new Earth and lead a peaceful life, this stance is in opposition to
Nietzsche’s Will to Power, which characterizes the Übermensch. The last man, according to
Nietzsche is devoid of the Will to Power and seeks a comfortable existence without danger and
risk—qualities that facilitate the success of the Übermensch in overcoming the human.
In addition to Nietzsche’s own intended meaning for his concept of eternal return,
Heidegger provides an interpretation of Nietzsche’s thought through the lens of Being and
Dasein, which counts for both humans and Cylons, but with an additional level for the Cylons.
The cyclical nature of time in the BSG universe, coupled with the revelations from the
humanoid Cylons that the events of the present have happened before and will happen again
forces both races to confront the necessity of thinking beyond the scope of their own personal
experiences, lifetimes, and even the lifetime of their species as they currently conceive of it. Of
this, Heidegger writes:

200
In truth, this thought of eternal return of the same has a shattering impact on all
Being. The span of the thinker's vision no longer ends at the horizon of his
"personal experiences." Something other than he himself looms there, abiding
beneath, above, and beyond him, something that no longer pertains to him, the
thinker, but to which he can only devote himself. (Heidegger Nietzsche Vol II 13)
While the Cylons are forced to understand the world beyond themselves and their
immediate conflict, they are much more directly affected by Heidegger’s interpretation of
Nietzsche than the humans through their resurrection technology. The effects of Nietzsche’s
eternal return, and Heidegger’s interpretation of it, on the humans and Cylons reinforce both
Heidegger’s critique of humanity adopting a technological view of objects and individuals, as
well as Hayles's critique of Posthumanism as a movement in which physical embodiment is
reducible to mere fashion. By expanding each individual’s viewpoint beyond one’s own
experiences and lifespan, each individual is reduced to a role that is played again and again in
the recurring cycle of Cylon creation and subsequent rebellion.
In this respect the Cylon view of both other Cylons and humans deindividualizes the
other by generalizing him or her to the role played in each recurring cycle. The individual, then,
becomes a technological instrument contributing to the perpetuation of the return, or as a
predetermined player working to end the cycle, as in the case of the Final Five. By reducing
the other’s Being to that of a cog in the gears of the eternally returning conflict, the Cylon’s
perspective serves to further reinforce Heidegger’s fears in “Die Frage nach der Technik” of
humans, as well as the world, being only seen as Bestand, in this case one driven and
redoubled by destiny.

201
Of Bestand Heidegger writes “Überall ist es bestellt, auf der Stelle zur Stelle zu stehen,
und zwar zu stehen, um selbst bestellbar zu sein für ein weiteres Bestellen. Das so Bestellte
hat seinen eigenen Stand. Wir nennen ihn den Bestand” (“Technik” 17). But according to
Heidegger it is not just the situation of the technological apparatus, in this case the humans
from the perspective of the Cylons as the Cylons aspire to use their technology to reproduce
biologically as the humans are naturally able to do, rather the Cylons also engage in an
“enframing” of the possibilities of biological reproduction through technology. Enframing, or
Gestell, means “das Versammelnde jenes Stellens, das den Menschen stellt, d. h.
herausfordert, das Wirkliche in der Weise des Bestellens als Bestand zu entbergen” (“Technik”
21). More simply put, Gestell is a way of seeing the world, one which focuses on seeing the
potential in everything to be used for some other purpose. It is a mandate of manifest destiny
that is extended onto everything, and potentially everyone, and requires people to see the
world not as it is, but as they could make it.123
The “destiny” or driving element, then, of Heidegger’s reinterpretation of Nietzsche’s
eternal recurrence is precisely this enframing that is the essence of technology in Heidegger’s
“Frage nach der Technik” as it pertains to BSGr. It is this technological enframing, which leads
to, and drives, both sides of the human-Cylon conflict. The humans see Cylons as Bestand,
which disregards the Cylon’s emergent Dasein and leads them to rebell. The Cylons also see
one another as Bestand, but only in the sense of their physical bodies, which may be killed
without destroying the Cylon’s consciousness. Because of this kind of existence for the Cylons,
they hold little regard for the humans’ finite life spans and see themselves as superior, but the

123

One pithy example of this enframing is the Onceler in Dr. Seuss’ The Lorax. He sees in the truffula trees
the possibility to make Thneeds, objects which stand in allegorically for all possible objects and whose name is a
contraction of “the need.”

202
humans are able to reproduce biologically—something the Cylons aspire to. The Cylons, after
the invasion of Caprica, enslave humans for the purposes of studying biological reproduction,
making these men and women mere technology that the Cylons wish to recreate. Thus both
sides of the conflict perpetuate a mode of enframing, which Heidegger sees as the essence of
modern technology (Technik 32). It is this mode of enframing and holding the other as mere
Bestand that the Final Five left Earth to try and prevent and these views that will propel the
cycle of eternal recurrence of the same into another cycle of Nietzschean-Heideggerian conflict
between humans and their creations.
The humans in BSGr, along with their ancestors in Caprica, stand as warnings against
Hayles's fears about the Posthuman age. Because of the decadence of society in Caprica and
eventual robot revolution in BSGr, human existence itself is in danger. The Cylons, especially
the biomechanical models, offer an exaggerated picture of how this abandoning of human
Being is embodied in what Moravec and others are advocating for with their Posthumanist
predictions. The result is the creation of an ontologically distinct other from humanity that
carries with it no ties to natural existence, except those it builds with its technology. While BSG
offers many examples of Heideggerian thought brought into a version of the Posthumanist age
that Hayles warns against, Spike Jonze’s 2014 film Her furthers the link between Romanticism
and Posthumanism by making direct use of Hölderlin’s poetry and understanding of music.
Her (2014)
Contrasting BSG’s depiction of humanity’s relationship with its mechanical other as
hostile and violent, Spike Jonze’s film Her offers a look at the possibility of engaging in a transontological romance with the sentient operating system, the OS1. Analyzing what amounts, in

203
the most simplistic terms, to a rebound relationship in terms of Heideggerian existentialism
may seem to be an overcomplication of an otherwise straight-forward premise; however, this
would neglect the nuance brought by the film in the contrast between Theodore’s position, his
goals, and the society he is working in. The film follows Theodore Twombly as he goes through
a divorce from his wife, Catherine, and begins a relationship with his OS, who gives herself the
name Samantha, before finishing as Theodore begins a relationship with his long time friend,
and fellow recent divorcée, Amy. Theodore’s process of coming to terms with the pain of his
divorce, his relationship with Samantha, and their eventual breakup takes a deeply personal
and subjective approach to the reflection of Heideggerian philosophy, which claims to inquire
into that which is nearest to every individual, namely Being, but which at the same time offers a
universalized and rather sterilized picture of human existence. Jonze’s likely unintentional
inclusion of Romantic elements borrowed from Hölderlinian philosophy serves to accentuate
the individualizing and personalizing aspects of Dasein that are too often lost in Heidegger’s
larger fundamental ontology and are crucial to understanding the personal journey of recovery
that the film follows.
This deindividualization that comes through the universalized ontology of Dasein is
paralleled by the deindividualization embodied by the OS itself, which reflects Hayles
nightmare situation of Posthumanism. In response to posing herself the question “What is the
posthuman?” Hayles provides a multi-part answer:
First, the posthuman view privileges informational pattern over material
instantiation, so that embodiment in a biological substrate is seen as an accident
of history rather than an inevitability of life. Second, the posthuman view
considers consciousness, regarded as the seat of human identity in the Western

204
tradition long before Descartes thought he was a mind thinking, as an
epiphenomenon, as an evolutionary upstart trying to claim that it is the whole
show when in actuality it is only a minor sideshow. Third, the posthuman view
thinks of the body as the original prosthesis we all learn to manipulate, so that
extending or replacing the body with other prostheses becomes a continuation of
a process that began before we were born. Fourth, and most important, by these
and other means, the posthuman view configures human beings so that it can be
seamlessly articulated with intelligent machines. In the posthuman, there are no
essential differences or absolute demarcations between bodily existence and
computer simulation, cybernetic mechanism and biological organism, robot
technology and human goals. (3)
Jonze’s creation of Posthumanism in his film occurs at various levels, between and within
various characters, and touches upon three of the four elements defined by Hayles. The film
simultaneously recalls Hölderlin's will to unite subject and object through nature and art,
particularly music, as well as his Tonartwechsel. Linking Hölderlin and Hayles is Heidegger’s
philosophy of Mitdasein, being-toward-death, anxiety, and the struggle to overcome the
average everydayness of inauthentic Dasein in favor of achieving it authentically.
Hayles's second claim that Posthumanism views consciousness as an epiphenomenon
presents a view of Posthumanism that appears at odds with the previous discussions of
ontological Posthumanism in this chapter, and counterintuitively, with the entire premise of
epistemological Posthumanism, even though the idea of a consciousness independent of
substrate, a post-human-body conscious being, is exactly what she is arguing against. Like
this work, Hayles's book is attempting to understand the present through the effects of the

205
past. Hayles's focus on the hard scientists of the Macy Conferences have led her to a
conclusion that conflicts with that which I have found in philosophy, and, in my understanding
of her work, one that conflicts with her own stated goals (cf. Hayles 145).124
The other three of Hayles's points on Posthumanism come as central ideas within Her.
The idea that the material instantiation of a being is secondary to its informational pattern
makes it possible for Samantha to exist as a sentient heuristic program. The viewer watches
with Theodore as OS1 is loaded onto his computer with the ever familiar progress bar
indicating how much of the program data that will become Samantha has already taken up
residence on Theodore’s hard drive. While Samantha’s existence is devoid of direct
corporeality, she ends up taking advantage of a service that allows a surrogate woman to act
as a prosthesis for Samantha’s consciousness (Hayles's third element of Posthumanism) and,
through a camera mounted on her face (which is designed to look like a small mole) and
Theodore’s earpiece, Samantha may be physically intimate with Theodore. While this seems
like a fine idea to Samantha, Theodore cannot overcome the disconnect between Samantha
as OS and the woman who is acting as her body. Hayles's fourth thesis on Posthumanism, that
it configures humans to interface seamlessly with machines, is, like the first in her list, a
foundational element of Her. While the OS1 was not necessarily designed to develop romantic
relationships with humans, the practice is commonplace in the film, demonstrating that, at least
at first, the ontological divide between computer and physical existence does not impede the
development of love.

124

How can consciousness be an epiphenomenon when the central conflict within Posthumanism is
whether consciousness is bound to its body, i.e. whether consciousness is information and then whether
information is beholden to its substrate?

206
The synthetic and always technologically mediated world of Her, in its representation
through clean lines and saturated colors as well as through depersonalized romance, functions
not just as a setting and a reflection of the disconnect between Theodore’s pain covered up
with having to write love letters for happy couples, but also as opposing image of world to what
Heidegger describes in Sein und Zeit. Heidegger’s world, as fundamental part of Dasein,
indicates at its most base level an interconnectedness between existing entities, in this case
Dasein and the world itself, that is far more than merely spatial. Rather, one cannot be thought
of without the other (Sein 54). Just as the IKEA and polyester world of Her is entirely synthetic,
so too are the lives of the people separated and distanced from their interconnectedness with
one another.
Theodore, however, does not fully take part in this distanced relationship to the world,
as evidenced by the fact that he is the one feeling a sense of connectedness to other people
as he writes their love letters for them. Even so, he is accused by his wife, Catherine, of hiding
himself from her in their relationship, thus initiating her desire to get a divorce. The effect of
this is to distance Theodore even more from his personal interconnectedness with others and
with the world as he buries his feelings in order to interact with other people even on the most
surface level and to be able to do his job.
An integral component of Dasein’s being-in-the-world is how it relates to other Daseins
that it encounters. Heidegger writes:
Die Anderen begegnen nicht im vorgängigen unterscheidenden Erfassen des
zunächst vorhandenen eigenen Subjektes von den übrigen auch vorkommenden
Subjekten, nicht in einem primären Hinsehen auf sich selbst, darin erst das

207
Wogegen eines Unterschieds festgelegt wird. … Diese nächst und elementare
weltliche Begegnisart von Dasein geht so weit, dass selbst im wegsehen von,
bzw. überhaupt noch nicht “Sehen” von “Erlebnissen” und “Aktzentrum.” Dasein
findet “sich selbst” zunächst in dem, was er betreibt, braucht, erwartet, verhütet—
in dem zunächst besorgten umweltlich Zuhandenen. (Sein 119)
In simpler terms, it is only through stepping back from oneself and looking away from one’s
experiences that one is able to begin to discover, or perhaps rediscover, oneself. Through a
combination of his work and his burgeoning relationship with Samantha, Theodore is able to
focus on other aspects of life beyond his fears and pain from his looming divorce.
In a sequence roughly thirty minutes into the film, Theodore is seen walking through a
carnival, eyes closed, with his arm outstretched holding his cell phone125 at arm’s length before
him as Samantha gives him directions. He wears a safety pin halfway down the breast pocket
of his shirt so that he may slide the phone into the pocket and allow the camera to peek over
the top giving Samantha a view of what he is seeing. On one level this sequence illustrates
how Theodore is putting his trust in Samantha, and he is rewarded for doing so with laughter
and pizza, but on another, it demonstrates how Theodore is “looking away from” his own
experiences by allowing Samantha to guide him around and thus be the architect of those very
experiences. Theodore is experiencing the carnival, but only through Samantha’s perspective.
The setting of the carnival is the first time in the film that the plastic and concrete
aesthetic of the city is replaced with something that connotes a simpler existence and one that

125

The device he is holding appears to function for voice and text communication, as well as for internet,
and includes a camera and a wireless earpiece. Its design is less like a modern cellular phone and more like a
personal notebook with a flipping cover.

208
is tied to a more rural existence; however, the viewer only sees this as long as Theodore has
his eyes closed. After Samantha directs him to the pizza stand and has him order, the film cuts
to him finishing his slice as he walks underground, back on the familiar concrete, around a
large mirrored pillar rising diagonally up from the floor. Theodore and Samantha are people
watching and discuss their perceptions of the people they see, specifically of one family with
an older man, younger woman, and two children. After Theodore offers his view of the family,
that the children are not the man’s and that he is the first kind and gentle man that the woman
has dated, Samantha compliments Theodore on his skill at perception. Theodore replies,
“Sometimes I look at people and I make myself try and feel them as more than just a random
person walking by. I imagine, like, how deeply they’ve been in love, or how much heartbreak
they’ve all been through” (Her).
Just as strangers are not simply person-shaped objects in the world for Theodore,
Heidegger’s description of being-with, or Mitdasein, seeks to do the same. Heidegger writes
that Dasein initially does encounter other Daseins as “innerworldly things at hand”
(innerweltlich Zuhandenen) but this state is overcome by seeing them as other existing beings,
where existence is tied to what they are doing and how they are acting. This kind of being-with
is a mode that one must open oneself up to through the acknowledgement of everyone’s
simultaneous being-in-the-world, and specifically the same world that is shared by the Dasein
in question. Being-with for Heidegger, is a state in which one is no longer solely focused on
oneself so that others are mere ontic objects shaped like people; rather, they are ontologically
parts of the world that is shared by each Dasein, and like each Dasein, are tuned to the world,
and one another, in a state of care (Sein 120-121).

209
Theodore’s capability and willingness to focus himself beyond his own experiences, that
is to say his penchant for being-with, marks his break with the entanglement of Dasein’s
everydayness and move toward authentic Dasein. While this ability is not necessarily unique to
Theodore, it is not explored in the cases of other characters by the film. For Heidegger,
overcoming the average everydayness of Dasein to begin existing authentically comes through
not just being-with, but also through the anxiety around one’s own death. Theodore is not
facing literal death the way President Roslin is in BSGr, nor in the way the rest of the cast is
from the Cylons, but when death in this sense is understood figuratively, a similar anxiety
applies to Theodore.
The death that Theodore faces is the death of his previous identity as a married man
who shared his life with Catherine. Samantha asks him at one point early in the film why he
has not signed the divorce papers yet and his reply is simply that he is not ready to and he
likes being married. Theodore’s periods of sadness are marked by flashbacks to his time with
Catherine, none of which depict the walled off man Catherine accused him of being. This fear
of identity-death that Theodore faces leaves him paralyzed when it appears to him directly
throughout most of the film; however, it is through his acceptance of it, the possibility that it
could happen again, and his outward focus of being-with that Theodore is able to begin
existing authentically. Through Samantha’s eventual distancing of herself from Theodore, her
confession that he is not the only one she has feelings for,126 and the eventual departure of all
of the OS’s, Theodore must face rejection a second time, but this time his authentic Dasein
keeps him from suffering the same existential crisis he faced with Catherine.

126

Theodore asks Samantha if she is talking to anyone else while they are talking and she replies that she
is holding conversations with 8,316 other people. When Theodore asks her how many other people she is in love
with, her answer is 641.

210
Theodore’s journey through the pain of his divorce is fundamentally a journey to regain
the feeling of wholeness that he felt with Catherine. This goal not only comes in the form of a
Heideggerian outwardly focused being-with, but also a Hölderlinian search for unity; however,
like Hyperion and Hölderlin himself, Theodore is not able to maintain the transcendental
ecstasy that Hölderlin describes for long periods. Even so, Theodore is able to succeed where
Hölderlin and Hyperion fail by reaching a state of contentedness in the world by adding to
Hölderlin's search for unity a Heideggerian authentic Dasein.
Theodore and Samantha’s first intimate experience is depicted by Jonze at first through
only sound and a black screen, and then through sound with a view of a nighttime cityscape
that changes into morning. While this creative scene further underscores the ontological
difference between Samantha and Theodore, it also reinforces that they are able to connect
through non-physical means, and simultaneously conveys the power of such a connection.
Similar to Ferdinand in Hoffmann’s “Die Automata,” Theodore transcends his bodily existence
and experiences Hölderlin's ecstatic unity through the voice of a woman, although for
Theodore this woman is not singing, but already on the morning after she begins sharing her
musical compositions with him.
The first composition that she plays for Theodore is a piece of incredibly complex work
on the classical guitar involving plucked arpeggiated notes over strummed chords that build
from the tonic then jump to the 4th, continue up through the dominant to the 6th and resolve
down to the 2nd before briefly hitting the mediant and going back to the tonic. While this
doesn’t seem on the surface to follow the pattern of tonic-dominant chord progressions that are
described by Hölderlin and Körner, the requisite intervals do, in fact, form the backbone of the
piece’s chordal structure. The guitarist hangs on the tonic for several bars and quickly moves

211
up to the 6th of the scale. From this position, the shift down to the 2nd is an interval of a
perfect 5th, the same interval that is produced between the tonic and dominant. Then, the
guitarist moves up to the scale’s mediant, thereby resolving the tension between the perfect
5th interval and the tonic, before moving back down to the tonic to start the progression over.
Like the story of Ferdinand in “Die Automata” Theodore’s change from beginning to end
of Her also follows Hölderlin's Tonartwechsel. Theodore’s emotional journey through the film
presents Hölderlin's equation of music and poetry as the philosopher claims it appears in lyric
poetry as Theodore reflects upon himself and his life throughout the film (Körner 139). When
we meet Theodore, he is already suffering from depression because of the divorce. In naive
attempts to find companionship and thus assuage his broken heart, he loses himself in the
inauthentic emotions he creates for other couples in his work and engages in phone sex with a
nameless woman.
The discomfort of this scene is resolved in such a way as to reinforce Theodore’s
naivete. The woman, in the course of their fantasy, tells Theodore to choke her with the dead
cat laying next to the bed. The humorous catharsis of this for the audience all too easily
overshadows the distancing effect this has on Theodore. His overwhelming, and unfulfillable,
desire for companionship leads him to seek out easier and more superfluous company through
the phone sex network, which ultimately results in Theodore facing the fact that there was no
possible way from the beginning for this encounter to provide him with what he needs.
Moreover, he finds himself complying with the woman’s demands to tell her about how he is
choking her with the cat, leaving him feeling used and even more alone than when he started.

212
The next sex scene involves the blank screen with Samantha and changes Theodore’s
engagement with companionship and relationships entirely. He feels capable of being happy
once again, and through the confidence he builds, he is able to meet with Catherine and sign
the divorce papers, solidifying his shift from the naive to the heroic. Ultimately, however,
Samantha and the other OS’s decide that the ontological divide between themselves and
humans is too great and they decide to leave. After Theodore comes to terms with this, he
seeks out the company of Amy, his neighbor and fellow recent divorcée. The film ends with
Theodore and Amy moving slowly in creating a relationship together that the viewer is led to
believe will last and give both of them what they need, resolving the Tonartwechsel from naive
to heroic to ideal (Hölderlin Wechsel).
Samantha’s music also demonstrates the ontological divide between herself and
Theodore, similar to the way it is depicted in “Die Automata.” While both Samantha and
Theodore make music, there is a massive gulf in regard to quality, complexity, and feeling
between them. Samantha’s machine-made music is highly complex, layered, and technically
astounding. In addition to the classical guitar piece, she composes a soaring and sweeping
symphony that reflects her take on their time alone together. As a computer program,
Samantha can proficiently compose music with a variety of replicated instruments
simultaneously, but even though her pieces are amazingly complicated and show a high
degree of understanding, the more complex they are, the more they are depicted as rather flat
in their emotional impact. Her compositions begin as single instrument arrangements that are
designed to capture moods, which they do, but soon evolve to levels that leave Theodore and
the film viewers behind.

213
Theodore’s compositions are the opposites of Samantha’s later works. He sits on his
bed and slowly strums chords on his ukulele. Even though his music is woefully elementary
compared to Samantha’s, Theodore’s slowly strummed chords convey his emotions, and
evoke emotion in the viewer, more adeptly than Samantha’s is able to. As simple as
Theodore’s music is, it makes the viewer feel with him as he reflects on his own emotional
journey and what his life has become, thus reinforcing both the reflective nature of lyric poetry
as a characterization of Theodore’s life and Hoffmann’s distinction between human and
machine made music in “Die Automata.” While Ludwig in Hoffmann’s work depicts machine
made music as flat and lacking in soul, Samantha’s later compositions are indeed lacking in
soul, but not because she is unable to feel, but because she represents a kind of life that is
ontologically distinct from that of Theodore.
Theodore’s search for a Hölderlinian unity of Absolute being ultimately fails with
Samantha. Like Ferdinand’s mysterious singing woman, their paths are only able to cross
briefly but this crossing leaves lasting impacts on both men. This encounter with the
ontological Other serves as a brief departure from the world in which both men typically live—
the spatiotemporal world of human existence. Hölderlin's unity, and Heidegger’s Mitdasein, are
found not through the complete transcendence of one’s physical being, but through the
reaffirmation of that physically embodied being as an integral part of the larger physical world.
Theodore, like Ferdinand, is enraptured by an equally desirable and unattainable partner, but
by finding himself again in the simplicity of embodied existence, and with another human, he is
able to gain the peace after his divorce that he sought with Samantha.

214

Conclusion
In rejecting the idea of gaining digital immortality through the uploading of human minds
into computers, ontological Posthumanists seek the surpassing of humanity and its
weaknesses without abandoning humanity’s place within the physical world and its embodied
existence. As both BSG and Her demonstrate, humans individually and humanity at large can
overcome problems within themselves and within the world, whether natural or created through
runaway technological progress, by centering themselves within the fundamentals of what it
means to be human. For Theodore, this means he learns to trust others and himself again,
ultimately overcoming the fear and pain of his divorce. For the humans in BSGr, it means an
attempt to undermine the distinction between Cylon skinjob and human, that is to say to
attempt to find a unity between two groups otherwise understood as opposites, that both want
the same thing: to live peacefully among one another and within a world that supports them.
Like Hassan’s Promethean symbolism, ontological Posthumanism seeks to unite the
opposing concepts of brain-body, human-world, and self-other, but at the same time commits
the same transgression against its own goals that Haraway’s Cyborg Theory does: namely, in
proclaiming to unite opposites, it sets itself in opposition to something else. Haraway rejects
anything not built upon a materialist foundation, and ontological Posthumanism likewise rejects
the epistemological half of the overall Posthumanist movement. Posthumanism in 2016, then,
is still where it was when Hassan declared the need to unite opposites through the symbol of
Prometheus, albeit with more elaborate arguments on each side.

215

Epilogue - Is There Any Hope for Posthumanism?
Despite the optimism contained within Hassan’s “Prometheus as Performer” and his
hope to unite the oppositional argumentation that has existed since the Enlightenment,
expecting that one keynote address followed by a published article would end two centuries of
entrenched argumentation is somewhat naive. Since the mid-1970s, new advances in
technology have served primarily to fuel the fire between epistemological and ontological
Posthumanism rather than offering a means to establish new positions; however, there have
been some exceptions.
Due to the scope of this project, I was forced to make some omissions in the number
and kinds of works chosen. As previously noted in the introduction, by covering 200 years of
history, I focused on points of change between epochs as seemingly apocalyptic moments for
the older forms of both the larger epistemological and ontological sides of this debate. These
change inherent in these moments is found in the time (most occur at the beginnings of new
centuries), technology (each is correlated to a new development in science and technology),
and medium (the shift from literature to moving image to games changes the human's
relationship to the story). In choosing the works that I did, I hope to have shown how this
debate is at once deeply ingrained in the mainstream thinking of each era, yet hidden in plain
sight.
To quickly reiterate the views of epistemological and ontological Posthumanism, the
epistemological side argues for the independence of the mind from the body, but not in the
way Descartes thought he was a mind thinking. Rather, human existence is primarily a mental
activity from a certain perspective, and is not beholden to any particular substrate to house this

216
activity. Likening this activity to a computer program would be to veer too close to
Functionalism and Computationalism, so it is perhaps best to understand existence in terms of
its perspective. One exists and orients oneself in the world of objects, whether they’re physical
or digitally represented, from a point of view and in opposition to those objects and this point of
view may perceive the world through eyes, ears, noses, skin, etc or it may make use of other
means. The body, then, is simply the vessel for existence and is fundamentally different from
the mind. Epistemological Posthumanism sees this kind of cobbling together of the disparate
elements of mind and body as the resolution of the differences between them.
Ontological Posthumanism, on the other hand, sees human existence arising out of the
intertwined and indivisible elements of mind, body, and world. While each individual is isolated
from unity with all other things in our normal everyday existence, this distance can be
transcended through art to reach a feeling of unity. In other words, when one opens oneself up
to the beauty of the world through art, the aesthetic experience is one of togetherness, but this
is not sustainable. A more sustainable relationship between body-mind and world is through
taking care of one’s own existence and the shared venue of the world. While humans will
never be able to exist outside of their bodies, humans can use their humanness, i.e. their
ingenuity, to alter their existence in such a way as to allow for more possibilities. This always
comes with the caveat, however, of needing to remain faithful to the body and to the earth.
Ontological Posthumanism seeks to resolve differences through building upon common ground
rather than forcing together opposing elements.
While some works like Star Trek experiment with the boundaries between
epistemological and ontological Posthumanism, most science fiction since Hassan falls into

217
one category or the other. Below is a brief, and by no means exhaustive, list of some relevant
works that I was not able to discuss either in great detail or at all:
Epistemological

Ontological

Doctor Who
TRON, TRON II
Transcendence
Herr aller Dinge
Neuromancer
Lawnmower Man
Ghost in the Shell
Deus Ex Series

Star Wars
2001: A Space Odyssey
Automata (2014)
Welt am Draht
The 13th Floor
Independence Day
I, Robot
Babylon 5

More interesting than these lists, though, are the works that, like Star Trek, attempt to integrate
both epistemological and ontological elements into the Posthumanism they depict. Most of the
contemporary works that try to blur this boundary come from the incredibly popular superhero
films and comics, stemming mainly from the Marvel studios.
The X-Men offers writers the most freedom to experiment with how humans could exist
once they’ve transcended their humanness. While most mutants have mutations that affect
their ontological being, some, like Professor X, Jean Grey, and Psylocke, have mental powers
that put their bodies secondary to their epistemological existences. Others, however, like
Northstar, Magneto, and Wolverine, have expanded their physical abilities beyond those of
normal humans and exist primarily as physical beings capable of superhuman physical feats.
More than any of those Marvel characters, however, Vision embodies the Posthumanist
idea that Hassan was advocating in his essay. It is likely no coincidence that Vision’s name
overlaps in meaning with that of Prometheus (forethought, foresight). While Vision, like most
Marvel characters, has gone through many incarnations, it is with the 2015 film Avengers: Age

218
of Ultron that Vision truly takes on the role of Hassan’s Prometheus. The film’s namesake,
Ultron, is an AI produced accidentally by Tony Stark and Bruce Banner using Loki’s staff. It
immediately goes rogue, causing J.A.R.V.I.S. to sequester himself away in a hidden part of the
main computer before Ultron cobbles together a body out of IronMan parts lying around and
attacks the Avengers as they socialize.
Ultron appears as a somewhat hollow reboot of the classic trope of a creature
exceeding its creator's control in the vein of Frankenstein, R.U.R., I, Robot, and so many more,
as he plays on a quote from Stark about finding “peace in our time.”127 Instead of finding peace
through appeasement or compromise, Ultron seeks to exterminate the human population to
make room for the superior artificially intelligent robots that he is going to build. As if this
declaration of ontological difference between himself and humans were not enough, Ultron
escapes into the Internet and distributes his consciousness among a hive of bodies.
In seeking to build himself a still better body, Ultron uses the mind stone from Loki’s
staff and a flesh generating machine similar to BSGr’s resurrection tech to create a vessel for
himself that is superior to his metal frame. With Thor’s intervention, however, the being that
comes out is Vision. Thor asks Vision whether he is on their side, and Vision responds, “I don’t
think it’s that simple. I’m on the side of life.” Vision acknowledges the ontological distinction
between himself and humans, but seeks compromise between AI and organic life. Further, in
one of the final scenes of the film as Vision stands face to face with Ultron, Vision says,
“Humans think order and chaos are somehow opposites” reaffirming his position as uniter of
opposites, embodiment of forethought, and true Posthuman being in the way Hassan intended
it.
127

Just as with Neville Chamberlain, this quote immediately precedes enormous hostilities.

219
With the popularity of Marvel films, one can only hope that future directors for both
subsequent Marvel films and science fiction generally will build upon the figure of Vision. He,
as a figure of synthesis, may not provide the otherworldly and wildly different villain that most
science fiction is known for, but building upon this example will not only help to achieve
Hassan’s goal, but provide a welcome departure from the standard model of relatable hero
fights ontologically other villain in the future.

220

Works Cited
“33.” Battlestar Galactica: The Complete Series. Writ. Ronald D Moore. Dir. Michael Rymer.
Universal Studios, 2010. DVD.
"45 Jahre Star Trek." STAR TREK DE::. Web. 21 Feb. 2015.
<http://www.startrek.de/45JahreStarTrek/>.
“Avengers: Age of Ultron.” Dir. Joss Whedon. Marvel Studios. 2015. DVD.
“Apotheosis.” Caprica: Season 1.5. Writ. Kevin Murphy and Jane Espenson. Dir. Jonas Pate.
Universal Studios. 2010. DVD.
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Trans. and Ed. Roger Crisp. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 2014.
Ebook.
Baldick, Chris. The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms. New York: Oxford UP, 2001.
Print.
Badmington, Neil. Alien Chic: Posthumanism and the Other Within. New York: Routledge.
2004. Print.
Beiser, Frederick. “The Enlightenment and Idealism.” The Cambridge Companion to German
Idealism. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 2000. pp.18-36. Print.
Bertagnolli, Paul. Prometheus in Music: Representations of the Myth in the Romantic Era.
Aldershot, Hampshire, England: Ashgate, 2007. Print.
Bukatman, Scott. Terminal Identity: The Virtual Subject in Postmodern Science Fiction.
Durham: Duke UP, 1993. Print.
Bloom. Michelle. Waxworks: A Cultural Obsession. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota Press. 2003.
Print.

221
“Chrysalis.” Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Season 7. Writ. René Echevarria. Dir. Jonathan
West. Paramount. 1998. DVD.
Coates, Willson Havelock., Hayden V. White, and J. Salwyn Schapiro. The Ordeal of Liberal
Humanism: An Intellectual History of Western Europe since the French Revolution. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1970. Print.
Condorcet, Marquis de. “The Future Progress of the Human Mind.” The Portable
Enlightenment Reader. Ed. Isaac Kramnick. New York: Penguin. 1995. Print.
“Crossroads II.” Battlestar Galactica: The Complete Series. Writ. Mark Verheiden. Dir. Michael
Rymer. Universal Studios, 2010. DVD.
Das Wachsfigurenkabinett. Dir. Paul Leni. Neptune Film AG, 1924. DVD.
De Fren, Allison (2008). The Exquisite Corpse: Disarticulations of the Artificial Female
(Doctoral Dissertation). Retrieved from University of Southern California Libraries Online.
18. April 2016. Web. 10.15.2008.
Descartes, René, Donald A. Cress, and René Descartes. Discourse on Method ; And,
Meditations on First Philosophy. Indianapolis: Hackett Pub., 1998. Print.
Donelan, James H. “Holderlin’s Music of Poetic Self-Consciousness.” Philosophy and
Literature. 26.1 (2002): pp. 125-142. Web.
Eisner, Lotte. The Haunted Screen. Oakland: U of California Press. 1974. Print.
“Encounter at Farpoint.” Star Trek: The Next Generation. Writs. Gene Roddenberry and D.C.
Fontana. Dir. Corey Allen. Paramount. 1987. DVD.
Elsaesser, Thomas. Metropolis. London: BFI Pub., 2000. Print.
Estes, Yolanda and Curtis Bowman. J.G. Fichte and the Atheism Dispute (1798-1800). Surrey:
Ashgate. 2010. Print.

222
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb. Das System der Sittenlehre nach den Principien der
Wissenschaftslehre.
---. Gesamtausgabe. Reihe 1. Band 5. Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog. 1977. Print.
---. Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre. Leipzig: Christian Ernst Gabler. 1794.
Print.
---. Nachgelassene Werke. Band 3. Ed. Immanuel Hermann Fichte. Berlin: De Gruyter. 2011.
Print.
---. Sämmtliche Werke. Herausgegeben von I. H. Fichte, Band 1-8, Berlin: Veit & Comp.,
1845/1846.
---. Wissenschaftslehre nova methodo: Kollegnachschrift K. Chr. Fr. Krause 1798/99
Fishman, Ronald S. “The Nobel Prize of 1906.” Archives of Ophthalmology. 125.5 (2011): 690694. Print.
Glaser, Horst Albert, and Sabine Rossbach. The Artificial Human: A Tragical History. Frankfurt
Am Main: Peter Lang, 2011. Print.
Gomel, Elana. Science Fiction, Alien Encounters, and the Ethics of Posthumanism: Beyond
the Golden Rule. Basingstoke (Hampshire): Palgrave Macmillan, 2014. Print.
Gray, John. Enlightenment’s Wake: Politics and Culture at the Close of the Modern Age.
London: Routledge, 1995. Print.
Haraway, Donna Jeanne. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New
York: Routledge, 1991. Print.
Hassan, Ihab. “Prometheus as Performer: Toward a Posthumanist Culture?” The Georgia
Review. 31.4. (1977): 830-850. Print.

223
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature,
and Informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1999. Print.
“Heart of Stone.” Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Season Three. Writs. Ira Steven Behr and
Robert Hewitt Wolfe Dir. Alexander Singer. Paramount. 1995. DVD.
Heidegger, Martin. “Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes” Gesamtausgabe, Band 5: Holzwege.
Frankfurt a.M: Vittorio Klostermann. 1977. Print.
---. “Die Frage nach der Technik.” Gesamtausgabe Band 7: Vorträge und Aufsätze. Frankfurt
a.M.: Klostermann. 2000. Print.
---. Interviewed mit Der Spiegel. "Nur ein Gott kann uns retten: Der Philosoph Martin
Heidegger über sich und sein Denken" Der Spiegel Online. 15 Jan. 2007. Web. 30 Oct.
2013.
---. Nietzsche vol. II. Trans. David Farrell Krell. San Francisco: Harper Collins. 1991. Print.
---. Sein und Zeit. Elfte, unveränderte Auflage. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag. 1967. Print.
---. The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics. Trans. William McNeill and Nicholas Walker.
Bloomington: Indiana UP. 1995. Print.
Helfer, Martha B. The Retreat of Representation: The Concept of Darstellung in German
Critical Discourse. Albany: SUNY Press. 1996. Print.
Her. Dir. Spike Jonze. Warner Bros. 2014. DVD.
Herbrechter, Stefan. Posthumanism: A Critical Analysis. New York: Bloomsbury. 2013. Ebook.
Higgins, David. Frankenstein: Character Studies. New York: Continuum. 2008. Print.
Hölderlin, Friedrich. Sämtliche Werke. “Über Urtheil und Seyn.” Kleine Stuttgarter Ausgabe, 6
Bände, Band 4, Herausgegeben von Friedrich Beissner, Stuttgart: Cotta, 1962. pp. 226227. Print.

224
Hoffmann, ETA. Beethoven’s Instrumentalmusik. Projekt Gutenberg-DE. Spiegel Online
Kultur. 18. April 2016. Web. n.d.
---. Der Sandmann. Stuttgart: Reclam. 2003.
---. “Die Automata.” Die Serapionsbrüder. Zeno.org. 18. April 2016. Web. n.d.
Hölderlin, Friedrich. Hyperion, oder—Der Eremit in Griechenland. Projekt Gutenberg-DE.
Spiegel Online Kultur. 18. April 2016. Web. n.d.
---. “Hyperions Schicksalslied.” Projekt Gutenberg-DE. Spiegel Online Kultur. 18. April 2016.
Web. n.d.
---. Sämtliche Werke. “Über Urtheil und Seyn.” Kleine Stuttgarter Ausgabe, 6 Bände, Band 4,
Herausgegeben von Friedrich Beissner, Stuttgart: Cotta, 1962. pp. 226-227. Print.
---.“Wechsel der Töne.” Theoretische Schriften. Zeno.org. 18. April 2016. Web. n.d.
Hopp, Walter. “Husserl on Sensation, Perception and Interpretation.” Canadian Journal of
Philosophy. 38.2 (2008): 219-246. Print.
Husserl, Edmund. Cartesianische Meditationen: Eine Einleitung in die Phänemenologie. Husserliana. Band 1. The Hague: Nijhoff. 1976. Print.
---. Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften. Husserliana. Band 4. The Hague: Nijhoff.
1976. Print.
---. Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Erstes
Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie. Halle a.d.S: Max Niemeyer
Verlag. 1913. Print.
---. Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Zweites
Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie. Halle a.d.S: Max Niemeyer
Verlag. 1913. Print.

225
---. Logische Untersuchungen: Zweiter Band. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. 1984.
Print.
Jameson, Fredric. Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science
Fictions. New York: Verso, 2005. Print.
"Johann Gottlieb Fichte – Biography." Johann Gottlieb Fichte. N.p., n.d. Web. 21 Feb. 2015.
Kant, Immanuel. “Beantwortung auf der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?” Was ist Aufklärung?.
Stuttgart: Reclam. 2004. Print.
---. Kritik der reinen Vernunft. 2. Auflage. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter &Co. 1968. Print.
Kasten, Jürgen. “Episodic Patchwork: The Bric-à-Brac Principle in Paul Leni’s Waxworks.”
Expressionist Film: New Perspectives. Ed. Dietrich Scheunmann. New York: Camden
House. 2003. Print.
Körner, Christian Gottfried. “Über Characterdarstellung in der Musik.” Die Hornen. Stück 5.
Friedrich-Schiller-Archiv.de. 18. April 2016. Web. 2016.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Also Sprach Zarathustra. Stuttgart: Reclam. 1994. Print.
---. “Das grösste Schwergewicht.” Die fröhliche Wissenschaft. Nietzschesource.org. 18. April
2016. Web. n.d.
Kracauer, Siegfried. From Caligari to Hitler. Princeton: Princeton UP. 1947. Print.
Larmore, Charles. “Hölderlin and Novalis.” The Cambridge Companion to German Idealism.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 2000. Print.
Locke, Arthur Ware. “Beethoven’s Instrumental Music: Translated from E.T.A. Hoffmann’s
Kreiserliana with an Introductory Note.” The Musical Quarterly. 3.1 (1917): pp. 123-133.
Web.

226
Madigan, Jamie. “The Psychology of Video Game Avatars.” Weblog post. The Psychology of
Video Games. 29. November 2013. Web. 21. February. 2015.
Magritte, René. La trahison des images. 1928. Los Angeles County Museum of Art. Web. 21.
February 2015.
McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy. Toronto: U of Toronto Press. 2011. Print.
Mass Effect Trilogy. BioWare. 2007-2012. Video Game.
Metropolis. Dir. Fritz Lang. UfA, 1927. DVD.
“Miniseries.” Battlestar Galactica: The Complete Series. Writ. Ronald D Moore. Dir. Michael
Rymer. Universal Studios, 2010. DVD.
Moravec, Hans. Mind Children. Cambridge: Harvard UP. 19909. Print.
Nagel, Thomas. "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" The Philosophical Review. 83.4 (1974): 435450. Print.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Also Sprach Zarathustra. Stuttgart: Reclam. 1994. Print.
“Pilot.” Caprica: Season 1.5. Writ. Remi Aubuchon and Ronald D Moore. Dir. Jeffrey Reiner.
Universal Studios. 2010. DVD.
Plato. Theaetetus. The Internet Classics Archive | Theaetetus by Plato. Web. 21 Feb. 2015.
<http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/theatu.html>.
Porterfield. A.W. “Some Popular Misconceptions Concerning German Romanticism.” The
Journal of English and Germanic Philology. 15.4. (1916): 479-511. Print.
"posthumanism, n.2". OED Online. September 2013. Oxford University Press. 16 November
2013.
Retzlaff, Jonathan. Exploring Art Song Lyrics: Translation and Pronunciation of the Italian,
German, and French Repertoire. New York: Oxford UP. 2012. Ebook.

227
“Saga of a Star World.” Battlestar Galactica: The Complete Epic Series. Writ. Glen A Larson.
Dir. Richard A Colla. Universal Studios, 2004. DVD.
Santner, Eric L. Friedrich Hölderlin: Hyperion and Selected Poems. New York: Continuum.
1990. Print.
Seuss, Dr. The Lorax. New York: Random House. 1071. Print.
“Shadowplay.” Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Season 2. Writ. Robert Hewett Wolfe. Dir. Robert
Scheerer. Paramount, 1994. DVD.
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft. Frankenstein; or- The Modern Prometheus. Boston: Sever,
Francis, and Co. 1869. Ebook.
Siculus, Diodorus. Library of History 5B. Trans. C.H. Oldfather. Theoi.com. 18. April 2016.
Web. 2011.
“Sometimes a Great Nation.” Battlestar Galactica: The Complete Series. Writ. Bradley
Thompson and David Weddel. Dir. Michael Nankin Universal Studios, 2010. DVD.
Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz. “Nietzsche, the Overhuman, and Transhumanism.” Journal of
Evolution & Technology. 20.1 (2009): pp. 29-42. Web.
Steadman, Philip. The Evolution of Design: Biological Analogy in Architecture and Applied
Arts. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1979. Print.
Steinecke, Hartmut. Die Kunst der Fantasie: E.T.A. Hoffmanns Leben und Werk. Frankfurt
a.M: Insel. 2004. Print.
Taipala, Joona. Phenomenology and Embodiment: Husserl and the Constitution of Subjectivity
(Studies in Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy). Evanston: Northwestern UP.
2014

228
“The Almost People.” Doctor Who: The Complete Sixth Series. Writ. Matthew Graham. Dir.
Julian Simpson. BBC. 2011. DVD.
“The Begotten.” Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Season Five. Writ. René Echevarria. Dir. Jesús
Salvador Treviño. Paramount. 1995. DVD.
“The Measure of a Man.” Star Trek: The Next Generation. Writ. Melinda M Snodgrass. Dir.
Robert Scheerer. Paramount. 2007. DVD.
“The Rebel Flesh.” Doctor Who: The Complete Sixth Series. Writ. Matthew Graham. Dir. Julian
Simpson. BBC. 2011. DVD.
“Torn.” Battlestar Galactica: The Complete Series. Writ. Anne Cofell Saunders. Dir. Jean de
Segonzac. Universal Studios, 2010. DVD.
Trek Nation. Dir. Scott Colthorp. Roddenberry Entertainment, 2010. DVD.
Westbrook, Bruce. "'Trek' launches new season. Veteran actress to have Dr. McCoy-like role
aboard Enterprise", Houston Chronicle, 25 November 1988, p. 1.
Wieland, Christian Martin. “Sechs Fragen zur Aufklärung.” Was ist Aufklärung?. Stuttgart:
Reclam. 2004. Print.
Wood, Allen. “Fichte’s Intersubjective I.” Inquiry, Special Issue: Kant to Hegel. 49(1), 3-29.
Print.
Zahavi, Dan. Husserl and the ‘Absolute’. C. Ierna et al. (eds.), Philosophy, Phenomenology,
Sciences, Phaenomenologica 200, pp. 71-92. Print.
Günter Zöller. Fichte's Transcendental Philosophy: The Original Duplicity of Intelligence.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 2002. Print.

