!

A Grounded Theory Study of How Homeless Veterans Manage Their
Chronic Health Problems
A dissertation proposal submitted to the
Graduate School
of the University of Cincinnati
in partial fulfillment for the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
in the College of Nursing
by
Jillian J. Weber MSN, RN, CNL
June 2016
Committee Chair: Rebecca Lee PhD

!
Abstract
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to develop theory to describe the process by which
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems and to explore the role of the
emergency department, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and other community resources. In
the United States, over 550,000 people will experience homelessness on any given night. Of
these over 11 percent are veterans, many of whom suffer from at least one chronic disease.
Homeless veterans face numerous barriers to receiving optimal healthcare and often overutilize
emergency departments and underutilize primary care services.
Design: This qualitative study used grounded theory methodology with a sample of homeless
veterans from one large Midwestern city in the US.
Methods: Participants included male veterans who were homeless with at least one chronic
disease. Recruitment was completed at a VA Medical Center emergency department, a homeless
shelter, and a soup kitchen. Audio recorded interviews were verified and then coded by a
research team using line-by-line, substantive, and finally theoretical coding.
Findings: Semi-structured interviews with 34 participants resulted in a theory describing and
explaining four different ways homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems amidst
the competing demands of daily survival. Additionally, three categories were identified that
describe homeless veterans' experiences receiving care in an emergency department.
Conclusions & Clinical Relevance: In order to end veteran homelessness, it is vital that
healthcare providers and policy makers first seek understanding from the individuals living this
experience. The findings from this study will help guide the future delivery of healthcare to
homeless veterans including how the profession of nursing can best care and support this
vulnerable population in hospitals, clinics, and across the public health sector.

!

ii!!

!

!

iii!
!

!
Acknowledgements
This dissertation was supported by funding from the Department of Veterans Affairs VISN 10
Research Initiative Program Grant.

!

iv!
!

!
Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Introduction

6

Chapter 2: Review of the Literature

18

Chapter 3: Methodology

51

References

64

Literature Review Tables

72

Article 1

103

Article 2

123

Article 3

145

!

v!!

!
List of Tables and Figures
Literature Review Tables

73

Article 2: Figure1: Pursuing the mission

132

Article 3: Table 1: Emergency department usage of homeless veteran sample

150

!

vi!
!

!
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
Homelessness in the United States is associated with poorer health status including higher
rates of communicable and non-communicable diseases, multiple co-morbidities, and higher
mortality rates (Schanzer, Dominguez, Shrout, & Caton, 2007). Homeless individuals also tend
to overutilize emergency rooms, underutilize primary care services, and require longer lengths of
stay at higher acuities as inpatients (O’Toole et al., 2010). Health becomes a compromising
factor for homeless individuals because more energy is expended on satisfying basic human
needs such as food, shelter, and safety. Only when these survival requirements are fulfilled are
homeless individuals able to focus on other issues, such as their health (McCormack &
MacIntosh, 2001).
Homelessness and Veterans
Homeless veterans in the United States are at an even greater risk of health disparities
than non-veterans because of their overrepresentation in the homeless population (Fargo et al.,
2012). According to the Department of Veterans Affairs (2012) a homeless person is defined as
an individual who lacks a fixed, regular and adequate nighttime residence or an individual whose
primary nighttime residence is a shelter providing temporary living accommodations, an
institution providing temporary residence, or a place not ordinarily used for sleeping
accommodations by human beings. A veteran is defined as a person who has served in active
military duty and was not dishonorably discharged (Perl, 2012).
There are around 22 million veterans currently living in the United States and in 2010 it
is estimated that at any point in time (point prevalence) over 76,000 were homeless (US
Department of Housing and Urban Development & US Department of Veterans Affairs ([HUD
& VA], 2010). In contrast, the total population of the Unites States is over 308 million and at any

!

7!!

!
point in time 650,000 non-veterans were homeless in 2010 (U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, 2010). Additionally, it is reported that 144,000 veterans experienced
homelessness at least one night during 2010 and that 53% of them suffer from some chronic
health condition (Fargo et al., 2012). Men make 90.2% of the homeless veteran population
nationally while women only comprise 9.8% (Pearl, 2013). Two percent of the homeless veteran
population in the United States is located in the state of Ohio (HUD & VA, 2010).
Homeless veterans represent a crisis for society because of their higher representation in
the homeless population in comparison to non-veterans. At any point Veterans represent 11% of
the adult homeless population compared to 8% of non-veterans (Pearl, 2012 & 2015).
According to a study completed with Vietnam era veterans (Rosenheck & Fontana, 1994) there
are typically four post-military reasons why veterans experience homelessness more often. These
include low levels of social support upon returning home, psychiatric disorders, substance abuse
disorders, and being unmarried. Of these factors, the highest risk for homelessness was found
among those individuals who lacked social support and were isolated.
These four identified risk factors create further difficulty for a veteran attempting to
transition from military to civilian life and maintain an adequate quality of life. There is a
significant lack of understanding from their non-military social counterparts regarding a
Veteran’s military experiences. Often there is no support present or support is lost upon return
home (Nyamathi, 2003). Many young veterans from the current war in Iraq and Afghanistan
come from low-income families that lack the resources to provide an economically stable life,
some come from families with a history of abuse and, therefore, the military was seen as a way
out of that situation. Psychiatric disorders such as depression, posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), and bipolar disorder along with drug and alcohol abuse that may have been exacerbated

!

8!!

!
or come from military service can cause difficulty in maintaining not only employment for
veterans but also positive social and personal relationships. Additionally, veterans often have
extremely specialized military training that may not translate to the civilian workforce and can
cause difficulty when searching for employment or conveying their skills to potential employers
(Nyamathi, 2003).
In order to support the veterans who are homeless in the United States the current
administration announced a plan to end homelessness among veterans by 2015 (U.S. Interagency
Council on Homelessness, 2010). The plan outlines six focus areas for the VA to focus on
including: education and outreach, treatment, prevention, housing and supportive services,
employment and benefits, and community partnerships (Pearl, 2013). This comprehensive plan
further highlights the need to address national homelessness among the veteran population and
make positive contributions to reduce this phenomenon.
Homeless Veterans and Chronic Health Problems
Homeless persons face numerous barriers to receiving optimal health care. Not only do
they suffer from high rates of acute and chronic medical illness but also the rates of mental
illness and substance abuse are high among this population and often contribute to their unhoused situation (Baggett, O’Connell, Singer, & Rigotti, 2010). Veterans in the United States
suffer from even higher rates of chronic disease and co-morbidities than their non-veteran
counterparts (Goldstein, Luther, Jacoby, & Haas, 2008). Chronic physical and mental disorders
experienced by homeless veterans are heterogeneous and do not necessarily fit any defined
health framework. Their complex pattern of health can be broken down into components of both
chronic medical and psychiatric health problems.

!

9!!

!
Medical problems experienced by homeless veterans include, but are not limited to
diabetes, hypertension, cancer, emphysema, and heart disease (Goldstein, Luther, Haas, Appelt,
& Gordon, 2010; Ropers & Boyer, 1987). Psychiatric problems include but are not limited to
bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, schizophrenia, and substance abuse disorders
(Goldstein et al., 2010; Tsai, Mares, & Rosenheck, 2012). Other illnesses such as ulcers,
frostbite, and malnutrition can be attributed to the general aspects of homelessness and exposure
to the elements. Given the large number of homeless veterans there is a significant challenge to
healthcare professionals and the general public health domain to address the multidimensional
and complex needs associated with this population.
Not only do the homeless have more complex health care needs but they also have higher
hospitalization rates and emergency department visits than the general population. Homeless
individuals also tend to stay in the hospital as inpatients longer and at a greater cost than both the
general population and impoverished populations (Adams, Rosenheck, Gee, Seibyl, & Kushel,
2007). Additionally, the age adjusted mortality rate for these individuals is four times higher than
the general population, which can be attributed to their lack of housing, poor access to care,
exposure to elements, unsafe living conditions, and delays in treatment (Hibbs et al., 1994).
Further, it has been determined that members of this population are hospitalized at a younger age
than their housed counterparts and suffer earlier from medical conditions that often result from
their social and economic situation (Adams et al., 2007). Since veterans are disproportionately
represented in the homeless sample there is a greater burden of treatment and cost placed on
communities and the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) medical system.
Homeless Veterans and Emergency Department Utilization

!

10!
!

!
When examining factors associated with chronic emergency department usage,
homelessness is one of the most common characteristics found (Mandelberg, Kuhn, & Kohn,
2000). Homeless persons often seek care in emergency rooms for conditions that could be treated
through other outpatient or primary care services as a result of their lack of knowledge related to
available and more appropriate resources (Parker & Dykema, 2013). Individuals who are
homeless often seek care at hospitals by way of ambulance, lack adequate medical insurance,
have poorer outcomes, and create higher economic costs for the service provider (Chambers et
al., 2013; Ku, Scott, Kertesz, & Pitts, 2010). They are also more than three times likely to have
repeated emergency department visits (Chambers et al., 2013). This over utilization of
emergency departments by individuals who are homeless contributes to further overcrowding,
decreases continuity of care, and compromises patient safety and the general health of the public
(Trzeciak & Rivers, 2003). United States veterans who are homeless face an even greater risk of
health disparities than other homeless subpopulations because of their overrepresentation in the
homeless population (Fargo et al., 2012).
The United States Department of Veterans Affairs
Homeless veterans are at a greater advantage in obtaining health care than their nonveteran counterparts because of the amount of federal resources available to those who served.
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has a healthcare system, Veterans Health
Administration (VHA), which consists of twenty-one Veterans Integrated Service Networks
(VISNs). These VISNs are based on a geographical pattern that works to maximize patients’
access to care and improve the efficiency of that care (Wilson & Kizer, 1997). A typical network
consists of an often multi-state region with six to ten hospitals, twenty to thirty community based
outpatient clinics, nine to ten re-adjustment counseling centers, six to eight home based primary

!

11!
!

!
care programs, five to seven VA nursing homes, and one or more residential housing facilities.
VA headquarters in Washington D.C. sets goals for each VISN where strategies are designed to
maximize health care for the veterans throughout the nation.
The VA also provides multiple programs to assist homeless veterans with care and
services. These five programs include Housing and Urban Development-Veterans Affairs (HUDVA) program, the Grant and Per Diem program, the Healthcare for Re-entry Veterans program,
the Veterans Justice Outreach program, and the Domiciliary Care for Homeless Veterans
program (Tsai, Kasprow, & Rosenheck, 2013). The HUD-VA supportive housing program offers
homeless veterans vouchers to help subsidize their rent and VA case management services to
obtain permanent housing. The Grant and Per Diem program helps to fund community agencies
that provide transitional housing for homeless veterans so they may achieve stability and
successfully reintegrate into society. The Healthcare for Re-Entry Veterans program provides
incarcerated veterans who will soon be re-entering society with support and VA health services.
The Veterans Justice Outreach program provides support to those veterans with recent
involvement in the justice system by providing case management services, outreach and acting as
a liaison between the veteran and the justice system. Finally, the Domiciliary Care for Homeless
Veterans program provides medical, psychiatric, and substance abuse treatment services on VA
grounds while also providing time-limited residential rehabilitation (Tsai et al., 2013). However,
it is estimated that only 10-20% of veterans actually use the VA services that are available
(Agha, Lofgren, VanRuiswyk, & Layde, 2000; Goldstein, Luther, Jacoby, Haas, & Gordon,
2008; Nyamathi et al., 2004). This lack of accessing federal services among veterans creates a
large gap of knowledge in how homeless veterans manage their healthcare and requires a look at
what barriers cause this to occur.

!

12!
!

!
The current climate within the VA system may also cause present and future homeless
veterans, and other subpopulations of veterans, to stray from accessing the VA system for
medical care and benefits. The initial eruption of the VA system occurred at the Phoenix,
Arizona VA where health clinics were using inappropriate scheduling techniques and thereby
diminished quality of care and timely access to care for veterans. Veterans ended up waiting for
months for an appointment rather then the VA designated 14 to 30 days (Zezima, 2014). The
negative, highly publicized, VA information may also contribute to returning soldiers’ lack of
trust in the federal system and create further difficulties for those that follow a route into
homelessness. At this time, the VA Inspector General continues to investigate VA Medical
Centers across the United States.
Barriers to Health Care
Overall barriers to accessing medical care for the homeless can be divided into two
different categories including patient-related and institutional-related. One of the most significant
and common patient-related barriers for the homeless population in general is the main priority
placed on finding the basic essentials of food, shelter, and safety. The need for those important
resources supersedes the need for health care services among all homeless populations
(Chwastiak, Tsai, & Rosenheck, 2012). Homeless individuals also report that an added patientrelated barrier is a lack of affordable health care. The majority of homeless individuals lack
health insurance which leads to limited or no preventive care services and thus increased delays
in treatment. With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act individuals who are homeless
may be presented with better health service options. However, this also adds an additional barrier
for the homeless by requiring them to complete the registration process and potentially pay a

!

13!
!

!
small fee for coverage (Tsai & Rosenheck, 2014). Those needing emergent care may seek help in
emergency departments but no continuity of care is in place.
One noteworthy institutional-related barrier is service fragmentation. This involves
providing services to the homeless without system wide coordination. Services may be available
at various locations and separate admission sites causing increased confusion for the homeless
person (Blue-Howells, McGuire, & Nakashima, 2008). Having multiple care providers in an
institution can make it difficult and often embarrassing for the homeless to attempt to coordinate
their own services and explain their lifestyle multiple times. There is a general stigma about
treating individuals experiencing homelessness and some providers may not be sympathetic to
their situation. Transportation to and from a health care institution is an additional barrier for the
homeless that may not be considered by an institution in regards to scheduling times and service
provisions (Nyamathi et al., 2003).
The barriers discussed above for the general homeless population can also be applicable
to homeless veterans. Other barriers that veterans may deal with include a complicated eligibility
process that determines what benefits the veteran is entitled to, fear of the government, finances,
and perception (Blue-Howells et al., 2008). Before entering into the VA healthcare system
veterans have to complete a multitude of eligibility forms and then go through a benefits
allocation process to determine their compensation and pension (C&P) award. C&P determines
what physical or mental conditions the veteran is eligible to receive benefits for as related to their
military service termed, service connection, and the degree of reimbursement (i.e. health care
coverage) for each condition. For example, if a veteran sustained a leg injury while in service
they may be eligible for 100% VA medical care for that disability. This process and delivery of
services at the VA in general can be very convoluted and cause great difficultly for veterans to

!

14!
!

!
navigate. Therefore, veterans may see the VA service delivery system as an increased stressor
rather than a benefit.
Veterans may also have a general untrustworthiness of the government from their
experience in the military and may choose not to become involved with the system. In addition,
there is a common misconception that all healthcare at the VA is free for veterans but this is not
necessarily true. Services may still require co-pays and be billable depending on veterans’
eligibility status and insurance. Finally, a veteran’s own perception of their health can influence
their capacity to access care. Utilizing healthcare services can be perceived as a weakness, which
is sharply contrasted with their military way of life in which they are perceived as strong (Gilliss,
2010).
Ways to Improve Health of Homeless Veterans
Various research studies have been undertaken about ways to improve the healthcare
management of homeless veterans. Two noteworthy recommendations include using a
comprehensive integrative approach to medical and psychiatric treatment and combining
resources in one geographical location (Goldstein et al., 2008; O’Toole et al., 2010 & 2011;
Blue-Howells et al., 2008; & McGuire et al., 2009). By providing a comprehensive approach to
care more services can be tailored to the population’s specific needs and increase timeliness and
efficiency of care (Goldstein et al., 2008). Additionally, the use of all-inclusive services, such as
primary care, provides a more cost efficient way for veterans to manage their chronic diseases
and increases their own engagement in their health (O’Toole et al., 2010 & 2011). Also, the colocation of services increases a patient’s access to care, reduces emergency room visits, and
provides more timely services (Blue-Howells et al., 2008 & McGuire et al., 2009).

!

15!
!

!
Although, these recommendations are significant, the majority of homeless veterans, and
homeless persons in general, are not treated in any of these ideal comprehensive healthcare
systems (O’Toole et al, 2010). Additionally, because of veterans’ previously stated lack of
accessing the VA system, it can be inferred that that many homeless veterans are using
fragmented services provided by shelters, community clinics, civilian hospitals, or potentially not
seeking health services at all (Agha et al., 2000). Further, homeless veterans often receive care in
both the community and in the VA system, which increases lack of continuity and overall
effectiveness (Agha et al., 2000). Homelessness is associated with poorer health status resulting
in higher rates of co-morbidities and higher mortality rates (Schanzer et al., 2007), which
translates to an ever- increasing need to address homeless veterans management of their chronic
health problems.
The dichotomy that exists between homelessness and management of chronic health
problems can be complex and multifactorial among veterans. Because of the patient-related and
institutional-related barriers previously noted, the significant lack of veterans utilizing the VA
healthcare system, and the lack of availability of population based resources there is still a large
gap of knowledge in how many homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems. These
combined factors create multiple questions about the life and experience of a homeless veteran
living with a chronic disease.
The Study
The overall purpose of this grounded theory study was to develop theory to describe and
explain how homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems. The specific aims of the
study were:

!

16!
!

!
1.! To identify the basic psychosocial processes used by homeless veterans to manage their
chronic health problems.
2.! To develop theory that describes, explains and predicts how homeless veterans manage
their chronic health problems.
3.! To explore the role of the emergency department, the Department of Veterans Affairs,
and community-based resources in managing the chronic health problems of homeless
veterans.
The research project was innovative in that the results provide a better understanding of
the process that homeless veterans undergo to manage their chronic health problems from their
unique first-person perspective. Knowledge discovered from the study can inform the design of
services to enhance chronic disease care of homeless veterans, reduce or prevent negative
disease-related health outcomes, and contribute to the current United States administrations goal
of ending chronic and veteran homelessness.
Assumptions and Definitions
Assumptions
The principal investigator operated the study under the following assumptions:
1.! Being homeless is not a desirable housing status
2.! Homelessness produces overall negative outcomes
3.! Chronic health problems generally last longer than three months
4.! The verbal declaration of veteran status by participants will be used for inclusion
Definitions

!

17!
!

!
1.! Homeless: Lacking a fixed, regular and adequate nighttime residence or one whose
primary residence is temporary or a place not ordinarily used for sleeping by human
beings
2.! Chronically homeless: Those who are continually homeless for a period of one year or
have four or more episodes of homelessness over a three-year period
3.! Veteran: A person who has served in active military duty and not dishonorably
discharged
4.! Chronic health problem: A health related problem that is persistent in nature and
generally produces long lasting effects
5.! United States Department of Veterans Affairs: A government run military benefit system
that provides integrated health care, financial benefits and burial and memorial services
to service members, veterans, their dependents, and survivors
6.! Community-based resources: Resources found in a non-VA setting that provide
comprehensive services such as social, medical, and mental health care.

!

18!
!

!
CHAPTER 2: REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
The aim of this study was to examine the psychosocial factors that influence how
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems. The purpose of this chapter is to
provide a comprehensive review and analysis of the current state of the science in order to
provide support for the study. The review of the literature will consist of a general assessment of
homelessness in the United States including the history, definition, patterns, risk factors,
population, and health status of the homeless; a close examination of the subpopulation of
homeless veterans, along with their health and chronic diseases, emergency department
utilization, barriers to care, and ways to improve healthcare. The chapter concludes with a
discussion of the identified gaps in the literature justifying the need for the study.
Homelessness
History of homelessness
The evolutionary pattern and classification of homelessness in the United States has had a
propensity to follow historical social and political movements. Before the Great Depression of
the 1930s the U.S. experienced relatively low levels of homelessness due in large part to the
Industrial Revolution (1820-1870), the Civil War (1861-1865), and then World War I (19141918) (Lee, Tyler, & Wright, 2010). However, with the onset of the Great Depression, and then
in post-WWII there was a reduced need for unskilled laborers and a lack of affordable housing,
which contributed to an increase in the homeless population. During this time period (19401970s), the term “skid row” became synonymous with a geographical area housing single men
who moved frequently from inexpensive hotels and lodging houses, drank often, and had limited
or no social ties (Lee et al., 2010). From the 1980s onward, homelessness has become a growing
phenomenon. Public awareness of the issue has recently been amplified due to the latest

!

19!
!

!
economic downturn and the increase in physical visibility of this vulnerable population through
multiple media outlets. Ultimately, this has sparked national and community responses by
promoting action and advocacy towards bringing the phenomenon of homelessness to the
forefront.
Homelessness defined
Various government organizations and stakeholders define homelessness differently.
Universally, the contemporary view of being homeless has to do with housing status and is
linked to a state of extreme poverty. The United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) defines homelessness more broadly as an individual who lacks housing or whose
primary residence during the night is a facility that provides temporary living arrangements. A
homeless person may live on the streets or in any other non-permanent situation (i.e. car,
abandoned building). HHS also considers those to be homeless who are unable to maintain their
own housing situation and may be forced to live “doubled-up” with family or friends (National
Healthcare for the Homeless Council, 2014).
The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) approaches
homelessness from a more limited viewpoint by defining it as individuals who lack a fixed,
regular, and adequate nighttime residence or whose primary residence is a place not ordinarily
used for routine sleeping accommodations for human beings. This definition also includes those
residing in shelters, those who will imminently lose their housing with no other residence to go
to, and unaccompanied youth and families with children who have not lived an extended period
in permanent housing (National Healthcare for the Homeless Council, 2014). HUD’s definition
of homelessness does not include those who are “doubled-up”.

!

20!
!

!
The United States Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) defines homelessness very
similarly to HUD by including those who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence.
Also included are those individuals whose primary nighttime residence is a shelter providing
temporary living accommodations, an institution providing temporary residence, or a place not
ordinarily used for sleeping accommodations by human beings (VA, 2012). Like HUD, the VA
does not include those who are “doubled-up” in their definition of homelessness. Health centers
and organizations funded by any of the previously mentioned government organizations or others
will generally utilize the HUD definition of homelessness.
Patterns of homelessness
Homelessness exists in various dimensions meaning that not all people who are homeless
can be grouped into the same category or cluster. Patterns of homelessness fall into three
different typologies according to Kuhn and Culhane (1998) who used cluster analysis to group
homeless shelter users in New York City and Philadelphia. The three identified typologies
include the transitionally homeless, episodically homeless, and chronically homeless. The
transitionally homeless are often in a temporary situation where they are classified as homeless
only for a brief period of time while in between stable housing situations. Those who experience
a period of transitional homelessness often only do so for one stay in the shelter system and for a
very short period. These individuals are more likely to be younger, less likely to have mental
heath, substance abuse or medical problems, and generally do not return to homelessness after
making the transition to permanent housing. The transitional group tends to account for the
majority of the individuals experiencing homelessness (Kuhn & Culhane, 1998).
Episodically classified homeless individuals cycle in and out of homelessness in between
short periods of housing stability. These individuals are also more likely to be younger like the

!

21!
!

!
transitionally homeless, but are more likely to have mental health, substance abuse, and medical
problems. They are characterized as having multiple episodes of short stays in the shelter system
and account for a smaller percentage of the homeless (Kuhn & Culhane, 1998). This could
include those low skilled laborers who may only be able to obtain seasonal or part time work or
those who spend periods of time in jails, hospitals, or other centers.
Finally, those that are chronically homeless generally live without a residence on a
permanent basis (Kuhn & Culhane, 1998; Lee et al., 2010). They are more likely to be older in
age, having higher levels of mental health, substance abuse and medical problems, and are
characterized as the chronically unemployed. They make up a smaller percentage of the
homeless population, have fewer episodes of shelter use than the episodic, but use the most
shelter days, signifying their stays last much longer than other clients (Kuhn & Culhane, 1998).
Antecedents of homelessness
The lack of a permanent residence, or homelessness, is generally caused by the inability
of persons to pay for housing. Multiple factors contribute to this inability to pay including both
economic and personal. Lee and colleagues (2010) classify the causes of homelessness into
macro and micro level proceeding factors. Macro level causes create a broader view that include
the overall economic conditions of the country including a decrease in the median household
income, rates of unemployment, lack of fair market housing or an increase in fair market rent,
and policy shifts that decrease spending on public assistance (National Alliance to End
Homelessness, 2013). Other macro level risk factors could be contributed to environmental
causes such as natural (i.e. tornado, hurricane) or man-made disasters (i.e. war) that could force
people into a state of homelessness. Micro level factors include those occurring at the individual
or family level such as lack of education leading to low skilled labor, physical and/or mental

!

22!
!

!
health status, and difficult family situation such as those who come from foster care, experience
domestic violence or incarceration (Lee et al., 2010).
A study conducted by Shelton, Taylor, Bonner, and van den Bree (2009) looked at risk
factors for homelessness in a young adult population in order to evaluate the factors associated
with a lifetime of homelessness. By interviewing young adults six years after they had previously
enrolled in a national study of adolescent health the authors were able to determine significant
differences between those young adults who had experienced homelessness and those who had
not. Findings showed that elevated levels of parental-caregiver abuse, neglect, violence and
crime, mental illness, out of home placement as a minor, drug abuse, and academic
underachievement are strong indicators of future and present homelessness (Shelton et al., 2009).
Overall, socioeconomic disadvantage remained a key link to homelessness in both childhood and
adulthood.
The homeless population
The United States national rate of homelessness in 2012 was 20 per 100,000 people
(National Alliance to End Homelessness, 2013). However, the overall population of homeless
can be broken down into various subpopulations. More distinct organization of the homeless
allows for better capability to advocate for those who need services and support. The most
common picture of the homeless is the lone individual who resides on the street or park bench.
However, according to the National Alliance to End Homelessness (2013), homelessness among
women and children is on the rise along with family households as a whole (i.e. husband, wife
and children). Additionally, a larger percentage of the homeless are sheltered rather than
unsheltered. Being classified as sheltered includes emergency shelters, transitional housing
programs, or a safe haven such as a drop-in center or mission (National Alliance to End

!

23!
!

!
Homelessness, 2013). Another major subpopulation of the homeless includes veterans who have
served in the military. This particular subpopulation will be closely examined in the latter part of
this chapter, as they are the homeless population of focus for this proposed study.
Health status and utilization of services among the homeless
It is commonly known that those who are homeless in the United States feel the burden of
disease more heavily than other populations. They experience higher mortality rates (Schanzer et
al., 2007), have higher rates of acute and chronic medical illness, have greater unmet health
needs (Baggett et al., 2010), and have higher rates of emergency visits and acute hospitals stays
at a greater cost (Kushel, Vittinghoff, & Haas, 2001). Without stable housing the homeless are
exposed to the natural elements, become victims or participants in crime, and receive almost no
or very minimal preventive healthcare services, (O’Toole, Gibbon, Hanusa, & Fine, 1999) which
all contributes to their poor health status. The significant linkage between lack of housing and
poor health creates an extremely precarious situation in that when an individual has stable
housing it could lead to an improvement in their health and overall quality of life.
To better understand the correlation between housing and health status Schanzer et al.
(2007) conducted a study to describe the health status and healthcare use of new individuals
residing in a homeless shelter over an eighteen-month period. The researchers looked at the
participants’ baseline health status upon entering the shelter system (i.e. newly homeless) and
their health status 18 months later. Rates of high blood pressure significantly decreased in those
who found housing during the study period and overall, those participants that found housing
showed the most positive changes in health status. Additionally, by looking at health service
utilization patterns of the homeless over a 6-month period O’Toole et al. (1999) were able to

!

24!
!

!
determine that by improving the structure and stability of a homeless person’s housing status
then it could lead to a decrease in use of health services for acute and episodic care.
As previously stated, mental health, substance abuse, and medical problems are strongly
associated with episodic and chronic patterns of homelessness (Kuhn & Culhane, 1998). When
experiencing multiple co-morbidities homeless individuals therefore need to access healthcare at
a higher rate than the general population to meet their needs. However, a study by Baggett et al.
(2010) reported that over two-thirds of homeless respondents to a survey reported that they had
at least one unmet health need in the previous year. The researchers examined the prevalence and
predictors of past-year unmet healthcare needs among 5 types of healthcare services for the
homeless by using data from the National Health Care for the Homeless User Survey. The five
types of health services include: medical or surgical care, prescription medications, mental health
care, eyeglasses, and dental care. The authors found that significant predictors of these unmet
healthcare needs include food insufficiency, out of home placement as a minor, and lack of
health insurance (Baggett et al., 2010).
With unmet healthcare needs and lack of health insurance, homeless individuals are often
left to utilize emergency departments rather than ambulatory or primary care services for their
health needs (Chwastiak et al., 2012). This comes at a greater cost to healthcare facilities and the
public as a whole. By describing the factors associated with healthcare usage of homeless
persons through a descriptive secondary data analysis of national survey data. Kushel et al.
(2001) were able to determine that there is an association between insurance status and the
increased use of ambulatory care services. Therefore, the lack of medical insurance among this
group increases their use of high cost acute hospital based care and decreases their overall access
to services.

!

25!
!

!
Additionally, homeless individuals more often have negative experiences when
attempting to access healthcare services than the general population. These negative experiences
can further contribute to their poor health outcomes by ultimately pushing them away from
healthcare services because of poor treatment. Kertesz et al. (2013) looked to better understand if
the needs of the homeless were more favorably met if they received healthcare services in a
delivery program that was specifically tailored to the homeless population. They found that the
patient-clinician relationship and perceptions of cooperation among the health care providers
were highest when the tailoring to the homeless was most evident. On the whole, higher levels of
population approach tailoring were associated with better experiences and outcomes for the
patients (i.e. homeless patients in this study) (Kertesz et al., 2013).
Overall, it can be determined that the health status of the general homeless population in
the United States is poorer and more health needs go unmet compared to those who are housed.
Additionally, there are multiple macro and micro factors that contribute to their homeless state
that occur not only during adulthood but childhood as well. However, since the proposed
research study focuses specifically on the subpopulation of homeless veterans a closer
examination is now needed.
Homeless Veterans and Health
Homeless veterans
A homeless veteran can be defined as a person who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate
nighttime residence, someone who has served in the active military, air or naval service, and who
was not dishonorably discharged (VA, 2012 & Perl, 2013). Because of their veteran status this
population has access to more personal resources than other homeless men, are better educated,
and are more likely to be working for pay than homeless non-veterans (Tessler, Rosenheck, &

!

26!
!

!
Gamache, 2002; Tsai, Mares, & Rosenheck, 2012). However, they still account for 11% of the
adult homeless population according to 2015 point-in-time estimates (Pearl, 2015). Rates of
homelessness have remained consistently higher in veteran populations than non-veteran
populations. Fargo et al. (2012) found that veteran status, older age, and black race were all
significantly and independently associated with risk of homelessness among men and women.
Additionally, male veterans were almost 50% as likely to be homeless as non-veterans in the
general population (Fargo et al., 2012).
The antecedents of homelessness previously discussed that exist for the general
population also apply to veterans. However, because of their military experience and specialized
training, additional factors are present. In a landmark study conducted by Rosenheck and
Fontana (1994), four reasons for homelessness among veterans occur: low levels of social
support, psychiatric disorders, substance abuse disorders, and being unmarried. Social isolation
and lack of social support after returning to civilian life are two of the most significant
proceeding indicators (Nyamathi, 2003; Rosenheck & Fontana, 1994). Also, their extremely
specialized military training may not translate into the civilian workforce and further solidify
their unemployment status (Nyamathi, 2003).
Health status and utilization of health services among homeless veterans
Veterans not only have to contend with more social issues that contribute to their
homeless position than non-veterans but also with a complex health status with multiple physical
and mental health co-morbidities. According to a study by Agha, Lofgren, VanRuiswyk, and
Layde (2000) veterans are more likely to have poor health status and to have more diagnosed
medical conditions than the general population. When comparing homeless male veterans to
homeless male non-veterans there are still significant differences in health status. O’Toole,

!

27!
!

!
Conde-Martel, Gibbon, Hanus, and Fine (2003) conducted a study to describe the characteristics,
comorbid conditions, and usual sources of care among homeless male veterans and non-veterans.
The researchers found that homeless male veterans were significantly more likely to report a
chronic medical condition, two or more mental health conditions, and less likely to access
community health centers for care. PTSD and hepatitis/cirrhosis were also reported at higher
rates among homeless veterans than homeless non-veterans (O’Toole et al., 2003).
Focusing more on the veteran population, Adams, Rosenheck, Gee, Seigyl, and Kushel
(2007) sought to determine if there was a difference in health status and health service utilization
between homeless and non-homeless veterans. The researchers conducted a retrospective, cross
sectional secondary data analysis of inpatient veterans who were hospitalized at Veterans Affairs
Medical Centers (VAMCs) on days that an annual housing census was conducted. Study results
showed that the homeless veterans were younger and more often had a discharge diagnosis of
substance abuse or psychiatric disorder than the housed inpatient veterans (Adams et al., 2007).
Another study comparing the health of homeless veterans with non-homeless veterans
compared homeless emergency department users with non-homeless emergency department
users at VA facilities (Tsai, Doran, & Rosenheck, 2013). The researchers used a cross-sectional
study design to compare the two groups on sociodemographic characteristics, medical and
psychiatric diagnoses, use of psychotropic medications, and other clinical characteristics. Tsai et
al. (2013) found that homeless VAMC emergency department users were more likely to be
younger, have hepatic disease or HIV/AIDS, and more likely to be diagnosed with a broad range
of psychiatric disorders including substance abuse and schizophrenia than their non-homeless
counterparts. In this particular study health insurance was not a factor in attaining care since it
was conducted at a VAMC. Therefore, it can be concluded that homeless veterans are more

!

28!
!

!
likely to use the emergency department, which creates an opportunity for providing specialized
services and comprehensive discharge planning.
As in the general population, having housing is linked with increased health status and
decrease cost of healthcare services among the veteran population. In order to further investigate
this claim, Montgomery, Hill, Kane, and Culhane (2013) compared two different HUD-VASH
housing approaches among a group of homeless veterans. The housing first group received a
case management program and prioritized immediate permanent housing for the veteran in
independent apartments. The veterans were also offered access to services that included social
workers, housing specialists, and healthcare providers. The standard housing group received the
baseline case management model in which the homeless veteran remains at their current
placement (i.e. usually shelter). The researchers found that by supporting permanent housing, not
only do rates of homelessness decrease, but also associated healthcare utilization rates and cost
of emergency care and inpatient hospitalizations (Montgomery et al., 2013).
Based upon the previously described research studies, we can conclude that not only do
veterans have poorer health status than non-veterans, but also that homeless veterans have even
poorer health status than housed veterans. Additionally, social isolation, lack of health care
service utilization, and the basic lack of housing contribute to their poor health status. These
factors strongly suggest the need for the proposed study in order to identify the process by which
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems and help inform strategies for
supporting their health.
Homeless Veterans and Chronic Disease
Defined patterns of chronic health problems

!

29!
!

!
Homeless veterans face both chronic physical and mental health disorders that are
multifactorial in nature and do not necessarily fit into any defined health framework. When
examining these multiple health problems, there have been attempts made to categorize
identified co-morbidities into certain groups depending on their pattern of occurrence in this
unique subpopulation. By making these distinct categorizations health care providers, advocates,
and other stakeholders can better understand what services might be appropriate for each group
and identify ways to achieve cost effective preventive care rather than retroactive treatment (i.e.
inpatient hospitalizations). Three notable studies (Goldstein, Luther, Jacoby, Haas, & Gordon,
2008; Goldstein, Luther, Haas, Appelt, & Gordon, 2010; Tsai, Kasprow & Rosenheck, 2013)
used cluster analysis, factor analysis, and latent class analysis in order to identify these types and
patterns of medical and mental illness found in homeless veterans.
Goldstein et al. (2008) not only identified patterns of illness, but also looked to determine
if risk profiles based on sociodemographic characteristics and duration of homelessness could be
related to the identified illness patterns. The researchers completed a secondary analysis by using
data from a previously administered interview-based questionnaire to veterans who were
presently or previously homeless. The available data included 3,595 interviews conducted over a
two-year period in one VISN. Homeless veterans from both urban and rural areas were included.
The researchers then used cluster analysis to classify the presence or absence of twelve disorders
and evaluated intergroup differences using sociodemographic characteristics. The researchers
determined that four resulting clusters best fit the data including: (1) oral, dental and orthopedic
disorders (dental/orthopedic problems); (2) eye problems, hypertension, cardiovascular, and
gastrointestinal disorders (generalized illness); (3) hepatic and gastrointestinal disorders (hepatic
disorders); and (4) hypertension with secondary elevations of cardiovascular and pulmonary

!

30!
!

!
disorders (cardiopulmonary disease). Goldstein et al. (2008) determined that over 75% of the
cases in each cluster also had at least one psychiatric disorder. In addition, only 18% of the study
participants were actually receiving VA benefits, which provides further support for the need for
better assimilation of homeless veterans into the VA system in order to reduce this phenomenon.
In another study, Goldstein et al. (2010) completed a secondary analysis on previously
described data set from the national survey to determine co-morbid conditions among homeless
veterans. The researchers aimed to identify the factor structure of health status of homeless
veterans underlying the identified clusters and evaluate the demographic and historical data
associated with each determined factor. Results showed a configuration similar to previous
findings rather than the presence of single disorders among homeless veterans. The authors
determined a five-factor solution: (1) cardiopulmonary disease without significant psychiatric
disorder; (2) mood disorders associated with orthopedic, eye and gastrointestinal problems; (3)
stress related disorders; (4) substance use or addiction disorders; and (5) psychosis. Additionally,
Goldstein et al. (2010) found that married participants were more likely to score lower on the
addiction factor than unmarried participants. Also, the odds of those participants who scored
high on the stress factor using VA healthcare facilities were low. Once again, this indicates the
need for the VA system to provide better treatment planning and care management for homeless
veterans.
The final typology study used latent class analysis to identify risk and need profiles of
homeless veterans and how they were referred to certain homeless service programs within the
VA system. Tsai et al. (2013) examined data from the VA’s Homeless Operations Management
and Evaluation System (HOMES), which was designed in response to the current administrations
initiative to end veteran homelessness by 2015. This included data from 142 sites nationally and

!

31!
!

!
120,852 veterans. The researchers identified four classes of risk and then compared those classes
to sociodemographic characteristics among the participants. The four classes identified include:
(1) relatively few problems; (2) dual diagnosis; (3) poverty, substance abuse and incarceration;
and (4) disabling medical problems. The group identified as having relatively few problems was
significantly younger, more likely to be female, more likely to be married, and had more years of
education than the other groups. The disabling medical problems group was most likely to have a
chronic medical condition, be older, and most likely to be unemployed in the past three years.
The veterans categorized into the dual diagnosis group had the highest rates of substance abuse
disorders, psychotic disorders, and psychiatric hospitalizations (Tsai et al, 2013). Identification
of these four groups contributes to a better understanding of how homeless veterans differ from
one another and what services might be the most appropriate for each group.
In each of the three studies previously discussed, researchers attempted to stratify the
many physical and mental health problems that homeless veterans face into various categories or
groups. Even though each study identified four or five differently named classifications, there
remained significant similarities across the groups. Working to identify the complex health
patterns of homeless veterans creates the need for diversity in services for homeless veterans in
both the VA system and the community. Additionally, broader knowledge about common
comorbid associations and a better understanding of the high correlation of substance use
disorders with the majority of problems among homeless veterans will help to enhance the
design and delivery of health programs. Given the large number of homeless veterans, there is a
significant challenge to healthcare professionals and the general public health domain to address
the multidimensional and complex needs associated with this population.
The Homeless and Emergency Department Utilization

!

32!
!

!
Individuals who are homeless not only have more complex health care needs than those
who are housed, but they also have higher hospitalization rates and emergency department (ED)
visits than the general population. When examining factors associated with chronic emergency
department usage, homelessness is one of the most common characteristics found (Mandelberg,
Kuhn, & Kohn, 2000). This over utilization of emergency departments by individuals who are
homeless contributes to further overcrowding, decreases continuity of care, and compromises
patient safety and the general health of the public (Trzeciak & Rivers, 2003). United States
veterans who are homeless are at an even greater risk of overutilization of emergency
departments due to their overrepresentation in the homeless population (Fargo et al., 2012).
Homelessness and the emergency department
Individuals experiencing homelessness often use emergency departments as their primary
source of care due to its ease and accessibility. Researchers in multiple studies have looked to
identify the predicting factors of use and common characteristics of frequent emergency
department users (Chambers et al., 2013; DiPietro, Kindermann, & Schenkel, 2012; Ku et al.,
2010; Kushel, Perry, Bangsberg, Clark, & Moss, 2002) in order to decrease unwarranted visits
and limit overcrowding. Other researchers have explored factors impacting a homeless
individual’s decision to use an emergency department and what health care providers can do to
provide more efficient and effective care in the emergency department (Chwastiak, Tsai, &
Rosenheck, 2012; Doran et al., 2013).
Chambers et al. (2013) looked to identify predictors of frequent emergency department
use among a population of homeless adults in Toronto, Canada. The researchers assessed
emergency department visit rates of 1,189 homeless adults over a one-year period using
administrative data. The results showed that the main factor associated with emergency

!

33!
!

!
department use was being homeless for two years or more. Additionally, while frequent
emergency department users represented only 10% of the sample, they represented over 60% of
the total visits to the emergency department during the study period (Chambers et al., 2013). The
researchers suggest improvement in care coordination and intensive case management in order to
reduce emergency department visits.
In another study, DiPietro et al. (2012) documented the clinical and demographic
characteristics of the twenty most frequent users of emergency departments in one urban area.
This was a retrospective study based on the review of administrative data from three urban
emergency departments. The sample only consisted of the top twenty of the most frequent users
of those designated emergency departments. The researchers found that the most common
characteristics among the top twenty users were homelessness, while having poor health was also
a frequent occurrence. It is suggested that the sharing of electronic health records between
various facilities would provide better care coordination among this nomadic population
(DiPietro et al., 2012).
In a national study, Ku et al. (2010) sought to characterize homeless people who visit
emergency departments and determine whether homelessness is the determining factor for
emergency department use or if other independent factors predict usage. The researchers
determined that the highest incidences of repeat emergency department visits were by the
homeless and that they are more likely to arrive by ambulance than their housed counterparts.
Also, the homeless emergency department users tend to be older, uninsured, and more likely to
be treated for acute injury, alcohol, drug abuse, or psychiatric injury. More comprehensive
discharge planning and specialized homeless programs in the emergency department may reduce
recidivism rates and create more positive outcomes for homeless patients (Ku et al., 2010).

!

34!
!

!
As a final point, Kushel et al. (2002) used a community-based survey in one large urban
area to examine factors associated with emergency department use among the homeless and
marginally housed. The sample included 2,578 participants who were able to complete a 45minute interview using a standardized questionnaire. The researchers found that frequent
emergency department users accounted for the majority of total emergency department use and
almost half of the respondents used the emergency department as their only source of healthcare.
Furthermore, 40% of the sample used the emergency department in the previous year, which is
three times the national average (Kushel et al., 2002). Again, the researchers recommend
focusing of emergency department overcrowding by focusing on recidivism among the frequent
emergency department users.
Chwastiak et al. (2012) examined the reasons that homeless individuals tend to gravitate
towards emergency departments for care rather than to some other type of service. The long-term
goal of the study was to improve cost efficient delivery of care and reduce overcrowding. The
researchers evaluated the impact of a serious mental health diagnosis on the use of a primary care
services versus the use of emergency department services for care by the homeless. Data
collected from a sample of 750 chronically homeless adults at eleven sites were used to
determine that lack of health insurance in the previous year was the strongest predictor for
emergency department use as a regular source of care. In addition, the data showed high rates of
chronic medical conditions and co-occurring psychiatric and substance use disorders among the
sample. The findings of the study suggest more aggressive attempts at increasing access to
Medicaid for the homeless may reduce unnecessary use of expensive emergency departments
and create cost savings.

!

35!
!

!
Another study about emergency department care delivery to the homeless provides a
unique perspective because it is based on semi-structured interviews with emergency department
physician residents. Doran et al. (2013) wanted to gain insight into the multifaceted process of
delivering healthcare to homeless patients in the emergency department in order to improve care
delivery and reduce overutilization. This grounded theory study created three unifying themes
relevant to delivering health care to the homeless: (1) medicine residents use pattern recognition
to identify and treat patients who are homeless; (2) variations from standard emergency care
occur when treating the homeless; and (3) navigating social care in the emergency department
can be strenuous and burdensome (Doran et al., 2013). A more uniform screening and
documentation process of homelessness may be beneficial in identifying the homeless and their
physical health, mental health, and social needs.
All the preceding studies focusing on emergency department care to the homeless have
common major themes. It was found that homelessness is a common characteristic of individuals
using emergency departments and also that the frequency with which they visit emergency
departments is higher than their housed counterparts. The majority of recommendations made by
the authors to improve care of the homeless in the emergency department and reduce recidivism
and overcrowding involve focusing on better screening tools, more aggressive case management,
and collaboration of care among facilities.
Homeless veterans and the emergency department
Some of the previous common arguments made in regards to the homeless using
emergency departments for their primary source of care are also applicable to the homeless
veteran subpopulation. However, because veterans have access to more personal resources
(Tessler et al., 2002) than other homeless subpopulations, and having health insurance does not

!

36!
!

!
necessarily play a role in their care (VA medical system), more significance can be placed on
their use of emergency departments as a primary source of care. Four studies regarding homeless
veterans and emergency department care will be closely examined (Doran, Raven, & Rosenheck,
2013; Hastings et al., 2011; Tsai et al., 2013; Tsai & Rosenheck, 2013).
Doran et al. (2013) sought to determine what patient factors are most strongly associated
with VA emergency department use. The researchers used data from the Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) electronic record and looked at all veterans who used VHA services in
the fiscal year 2010. This included 5,531,379 patients who received some type of service with
close attention paid to the number of emergency department visits to any VHA facility. The
study results indicated that the strongest sociodemographic correlation of emergency department
use was homelessness. Specifically, homeless veterans were 6.6 times more likely to be amongst
the most frequent emergency department users. Other factors strongly associated with emergency
department use include schizophrenia, opioid prescription use, and heart failure (Doran et al.,
2013). A common theme amongst high frequency emergency department users was psychosocial
and medical vulnerability.
In a study conducted by Hastings et al. (2011), researchers identified national VAMC
emergency department disposition rates, and sought to determine the frequency of repeat
emergency department visits, hospitalizations, and deaths experienced by those veterans who
were treated and released from a VAMC emergency department. Finally, the authors wanted to
identify any factors that predict repeated emergency department visits within thirty days of
discharge. In order to collect these data, a retrospective cohort study was completed using a
national sample of 649,537 eligible veterans who had at least one visit to a VAMC emergency
department. Results showed that homelessness was ten times higher in the sample of veterans

!

37!
!

!
treated and released from emergency departments and was a predictor of repeat visits and
hospitalizations. Homeless veterans also face challenges with obtaining medications, arranging
outpatient and follow-up care, and securing transportation (Hastings et al., 2011). Additionally,
their higher severity of illness and lack of social support places them at an increased risk of
return to emergency departments. Better screening methods are needed to identify veterans at
risk and ensure timely follow-up care to avoid frequent returns to the emergency department.
In order to determine the differences in sociodemographic characteristics and medical
and psychiatric diagnoses between homeless and housed veterans who use VA emergency
departments, Tsai et al. (2013) used a cross sectional study design to compare the two groups.
The sample consisted of all veterans nationally who had used a VA emergency department in
2010. Study results showed that homeless emergency department users were younger, more
likely to have liver disease, HIV/AIDS, and a broad range of diagnosed psychiatric disorders.
Also, the odds of being diagnosed with a drug use disorder, schizophrenia, or adjustment
disorders were more than double those of housed veterans using emergency departments (Tsai et
al., 2013). Once again, social isolation along with medical and psychiatric illness plays a role in
the high frequency use of emergency departments by homeless veterans.
Finally, a study by Tsai and Rosenheck (2013) compared homeless VA service users to
domiciled VA service users and their rates of emergency department use along with
sociodemographic and clinical characteristics over a one-year period. The researchers utilized
data from the VA electronic patient record system to further break down the sample into three
groups: (1) non-emergency department users; (2) moderate (1-4 visits during study period)
emergency department users; and (3) frequent (more than 4 visits during study period)
emergency department users. Results showed that the homeless VA users were more than seven

!

38!
!

!
times likely to be frequent emergency department visitors than domiciled VA service users and
overall three times as likely to use the emergency department for care than the domiciled VA
service users. The largest difference between homeless emergency department VA users and
non-users was the diagnosis of a chronic disorder such as liver disease and heart failure. Overall,
almost half of the homeless VA service users had used the emergency department at least once
during the study year period.
After reviewing studies that focus on both the homeless and homeless veterans in regards
to emergency department utilization for care, it can be concluded that the general characteristic
of homelessness increases the likelihood of an individual using an emergency department for
healthcare, rather than some other source (i.e. ambulatory care, primary care). The initial studies
regarding the homeless and emergency department use were all based on samples of homeless
individuals and not the specifically identified homeless veteran population. However, from
earlier research we know that even when health insurance is not a factor (Tsai et al., 2013),
homeless veterans will still utilize emergency departments as a source of care rather than some
other type of care service. Additionally, it is understood that veterans who are homeless may not
necessarily access the VA system (Agha et al., 2000; Goldstein et al., 2008; Goldstein et al.,
2010) and may instead choose to receive care in the community setting. Therefore, it can be
inferred that the information examined pertaining to the general homeless population is also
applicable to homeless veterans. In addition, the other studies examined that focused on
homeless veterans and their use of the emergency departments for primary healthcare further
support the need for better healthcare management for the homeless veteran population.
Barriers to Health Care

!

39!
!

!
For homeless individuals healthcare can become a compromising factor. The basic
human requirements of food, shelter, and safety are often placed at the forefront in regards to
daily needs rather than high blood pressure medication or insulin for diabetes. However,
additional patient-related and institutional-related barriers to healthcare exist for the homeless,
and explicitly homeless veterans, making access to healthcare and care management that much
more problematic.
Barriers to health care for the homeless
A major patient-related barrier to healthcare that is the most obvious and significant is the
lack of basic essential needs for survival including food, shelter, and safety. Baggett et al. (2010)
looked at the predictors of unmet healthcare needs among a national sample of homeless adults.
Significant predictors of unmet needs included food insufficiency and lack of health insurance.
The researchers also found that if employment was the sole source of income in a poverty
setting, then participants often prioritized work over their health. This indicates that not only is
lack of food a barrier to healthcare, but also inflexible employment which may keep an
individual from receiving and financing care (i.e. no health insurance) (Baggett et al., 2010).
A major study finding by Chwastiak et al. (2012) was in agreement with the formerly
discussed findings in that lack of health insurance in the preceding year was the strongest
indicator of not engaging in primary care services but rather using emergency departments for
care which may be costlier, inefficient, and less effective for continuity and chronic health
problems. The researchers support the need for more aggressive attempts to expand the scope of
health policy covering homeless and other disadvantaged populations to achieve cost saving and
better continuity of care (Chwastiak et al., 2012).

!

40!
!

!
Another study by Kushel et al. (2001) described factors associated with use of perceived
barriers to healthcare among a national sample of homeless persons. The results indicated again
that a lack of healthcare insurance is consistently associated with decreased access to healthcare
services. A positive association between insurance status and increased ambulatory care services
was shown to decrease barriers to care. Ultimately, the results supported the need for improving
medical insurance among the homeless in order to decrease high rates of emergency department
use and increase ambulatory/primary care services to improve the overall morbidity of the
homeless population (Kushel et al., 2001).
An institutional-related barrier described by Kertesz et al. (2013) relates to the technique
in which care is delivered to the homeless. The researchers compared homeless patients’
experiences in healthcare organizations based on their differing degree of service delivery
design. A survey was used to compare patient experiences at five sites that differed in their
degree to which primary care service delivery was tailored (tailored to homeless and traditional).
Results showed that when tailoring care delivery to the homeless was most pronounced the
patient-clinician relationship and perceptions of cooperation among providers was highest.
Overall, homeless participants rated better personal experiences with service delivery when
higher levels of tailoring occurred. These results indicate that personalizing care to specific
populations may improve willingness to seek care and overall compliance with care provider
recommendations.
Finally, a study completed by Wen, Hudak, and Hwang (2007) examined perceptions and
experiences of “welcomeness” and “unwelcomeness” by homeless persons during past
encounters with healthcare providers. The authors completed a qualitative analysis of in-depth
interviews with homeless men and women from five different shelters in Toronto, Canada.

!

41!
!

!
Respondents indicated that unwelcome experiences with a healthcare provider caused a strong
emotional response that deterred them from seeking healthcare in the future. These unwelcome
experiences were strongly linked with feelings of discrimination and stereotypes against them.
By creating a welcoming and open environment for this particular vulnerable population there is
a better chance to provide more effective care and to reach more individuals (Hwang et al.,
2007).
Barriers to health care for homeless veterans
Not only do homeless veterans experience the same barriers to care as the general
homeless population, they also face barriers related to their military experience and veteran
status. A study completed by Applewhite (1997) explored the perceptions of homeless veterans
about the nature and scope of homelessness and the obstacles encountered in obtaining services.
The researcher used focus groups with a semi-structured interview guide to collect data. The
results indicated that not only were physical health, mental health, and substance abuse problems
major obstacles to overcoming homelessness, but also self-esteem problems. Veterans who
experienced combat duty while serving in the military were more likely to report experiencing
psychosocial and psychiatric problems that precluded them from escaping homelessness. They
also felt that there was a stigma associated with being homeless in that the public blamed them
for their life circumstances. Additionally, homeless veterans felt that the VA service delivery
system was often confusing, insensitive, and full of bureaucratic obstacles. Ultimately,
participants called for an improvement in service delivery and more services to help with
reintegration into civilian life in order to become more productive and positively contributing
members of society (Applewhite, 1997).

!

42!
!

!
In another study, Nyamathi et al. (2004) looked at perceptions of homeless veterans as
compared to homeless non-veterans in one large urban area. Data were collected as part of a
larger study where a case managed health program by a nurse was compared with a standard
program for homeless adults with tuberculosis. The researchers examined sociodemographic
factors, personal factors, situational factors, and behavioral factors. Ultimately, they found that
homeless veterans were significantly less likely to perceive their health status as fair/poor
compared to non-veteran homeless men. This can be attributed to their military training and
experience by not wanting to appear weak or in need of help. In addition, only about 20% of the
participating veterans reported receiving veterans’ specific benefits. This report of limited VA
benefit coverage by homeless veterans may reflect the convoluted process of establishing
eligibility and registering for health benefits in the VA system (Nyamathi et al., 2004).
Finally, a case study by Blue-Howells, McGuire and Nakashima (2008) looked at the colocation of services for homeless veterans in one VA health care system (Greater Los Angeles)
in order to reduce patient-related barriers and institution-related barriers. The investigators
recognized that many homeless veterans lacked needed transportation to multiple scheduled
appointments and that those appointments were scheduled at various times and on various days.
A new program offered the same day co-located mental health, medical and homeless services
with a coordinated intake system. After the researchers evaluated this new innovative system,
continuity and rapidity of care were found to be promoted by the creation of an access center for
homeless veterans that conducted screening, assessment, and referral to all services on a one-stop
basis. The program reduced patient-related barriers such as transportation (one-stop service) and
lack of health insurance (VA system) while also reducing institution-related barriers such as
service fragmentation (coordinated intake system). The results also showed that the unique

!

43!
!

!
blending of traditional primary care services with homeless care lead to quicker services for the
homeless veterans and improved access to medical care, mental health, and social services (BlueHowells et al., 2008). It also reduces the need for homeless veterans to explain their situation to
multiple care providers producing feelings of weakness and discrimination.
The patient-related barriers, institutional-related barriers, and VA specific barriers to
healthcare discussed above all have an effect of the healthcare management of homeless
veterans. Even though homeless veterans may have access to more healthcare resources than the
general homeless population because of their veteran status, many do not necessarily utilize the
VA system in order to obtain healthcare services (Agha et al., 2000; Nyamathi et al., 2004).
Often a homeless veteran’s own perception and experiences within the military cause the largest
barrier to receiving needed care. Creating a unique health care system for homeless veterans that
combines their primary care treatment with homeless care services (Blue-Howells et al., 2008) is
one way to potentially reduce the various barriers to care that they face.
Models of Care for Improving Health of Homeless Veterans
After examining the history of homelessness, the health status of the homeless and
homeless veterans, where they access care, and barriers to care, it is important to examine what
research recommendations that have been made that demonstrate innovative models or programs
of care to improve the health of homeless veterans. Recommendations from successful studies
and programs across the United States can provide a constructive contribution to reducing this
phenomenon.
One effective program for homeless veterans implemented by the Veterans Affairs
Greater Los Angeles Healthcare system (GLA) was previously discussed (Blue-Howells et al.,
2008). When looking at the GLA health system, services for homeless veterans were originally

!

44!
!

!
offered by separate departments and in multiple buildings that were across campus from one
another creating an issue with transportation and lack of coordination of services. Additionally,
complex scheduling issues resulted in long wait times for veterans to receive care. To improve
veterans’ access to care, the GLA modified an existing framework developed at the West Haven,
CT VA to address the needs of homeless veterans. This model allows for the co-location of
medical, mental health, and homeless services (i.e. housing opportunities and social services) in
order to increase utilization of resources. In addition, a one-stop center was created to provide
more comprehensive and timely access to services for the homeless by allowing for screenings,
assessments, and referrals to take place collectively. The program has been recognized as best
practice by the Veterans Health Administration and has served thousands of homeless veterans in
the GLA area (Blue-Howells et al., 2008).
Two different quasi-experimental designed studies (McGuire, Gelberg, Blue-Howells, &
Rosenheck, 2009; O’Toole et al., 2011) looked at new models for providing integrated healthcare
to homeless veterans. The first study, by McGuire et al. (2009), investigated whether a
demonstration clinic integrating homeless, primary care, and mental health services for homeless
veterans with serious mental illness or substance abuse would improve medical health care
access and physical health status. The researchers compared the usual VA care group with the
integrated care group after the demonstration clinic opened. The pre and post integration groups
were recruited from the waiting room of one homeless drop-in center. Results indicated that
veterans in the integrated care group received primary care appointments quicker, had higher
levels of preventive care, and lower levels of emergency department use than veterans in the
traditional group. These findings suggest that an integrated model of care can improve the

!

45!
!

!
quality of medical care for the homeless and particularly the homeless with serious mental
illness.
The second quasi-experimental study by O’Toole et al. (2011) compared outcomes
between a population based patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model of care and a
traditional patient care approach. The PCMH model uses seven core principles to provide
population specific care. These care principles include: patient driven, team-based, efficient,
comprehensive, continuous, honest and respectful communication, and coordination across all
aspects of the healthcare system (O’Toole et al., 2011). The investigators used pre and post
analysis of patients enrolled in a special-population PCMH in 2008 who were previously
enrolled in a traditional primary care clinic. Results showed that enrollment in a population
specific PCMH can increase participant’s engagement in access to primary care and improve
their chronic disease monitoring and management outcomes. By tailoring the PCMH model to
the specific needs of a vulnerable population (i.e. homeless veterans) there is the potential for
improvement of care and increased utilization of care resources, which improves overall health
outcomes and quality of life (O’Toole et al., 2011).
Another study completed by O’Toole et al. (2010) used a retrospective cohort design to
examine the difference in two groups of homeless veterans using a population tailored primary
care clinic compared to a general internal medicine clinic. The researchers wanted to determine
if the population-tailored approach to primary care delivery was associated with better health
care outcomes for homeless veterans. Over a twelve-month time period, homeless veterans
enrolled in a homeless oriented primary care (HOPC) clinic were compared to a historical
sample of patients seen in the general medicine (GIM) clinic at Providence VA Medical Center.
The investigators’ findings suggest that a population tailored approach to primary care services

!

46!
!

!
improves access to health care, decreases medical admissions, and improves chronic disease
management. Additionally, tailoring primary care specifically to homeless veterans can decease
unnecessary emergency department visits, which in turn reduces emergency department
overcrowding and cost (O’Toole et al., 2010).
Another study using a population specific design to deliver primary care services was
completed by Kertesz et al. (2013). Homeless patients’ experiences of care in healthcare
organizations that differed in their degree of primary care design service delivery were
compared. The authors used a survey to compare patient experiences at five different sites that
varied in their degree of primary care services to the homeless. Results indicated that tailoring
primary care service delivery to the homeless is associated with superior experience by the
patients and results in improved perception and cooperation between providers and patients.
Ultimately, an unfavorable experience was 1.5 to 2 times more common at the mainstream sites
where no population specific tailoring occurred (Kertesz et al., 2013).
A final study by O’Toole et al. (2013) compared service use among the homeless and
non-homeless veterans newly enrolled in a medical model home service delivery system during a
6-month period. The homeless veterans were enrolled in the homeless-specific patient-aligned
care team while the non-homeless were enrolled in the general population patient-aligned care
team. The homeless veterans were compared with non-homeless veterans in regards to their
medical health, mental health, and substance abuse conditions. Initially, 48% of the homeless
cohort accessed the emergency department for care. However, results showed that the homeless
who utilized primary cares services were more likely to have no emergency department use in
the latter 3 months of the study. By providing an alternative setting with enhanced access and a
population tailored approach (homeless-specific), a reduction in expensive emergency

!

47!
!

!
department visits and unmet health needs of vulnerable populations can occur (O’Toole, et al.,
2013).
All six studies suggest the need for a comprehensive population-tailored approach to
providing healthcare to homeless veterans. Co-locating medical care, psychiatric care, and
homeless services result in improved access to healthcare and social services for homeless
veterans in a more timely and efficient manner. Using an integrated primary care model provides
optimal continuity of care for veterans’ multiple co-morbidities and potentially specialized
situation. The majority of these recommendations are tailored to the VA system, but can also be
applicable to other civilian health care systems. Since the VA is nationwide, it is able to
represent our country’s diverse population and the various frameworks can simply be modified
to fit the needs of other healthcare institutions. The most noteworthy recommendations to
improve the health of the homeless require combining resources in one location and using a
comprehensive integrated primary care approach can be generalizable across all homeless
populations. Moreover, working to provide continuity of care for homeless veterans may
increase their own personal engagement in their health and consequently improve their overall
quality of life.
Conclusion
The aim of this study was to examine the psychosocial factors that influence how
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems. The homeless face numerous barriers
to receiving suitable health care services. They have higher rates of physical illness, mental
illness, and substance abuse. Also, they are more likely to utilize emergency rooms, be admitted
to the hospital at a younger age, and have longer lengths of stay at a greater cost (O’Toole et al.,
2010). All of these factors lead to a higher age-adjusted mortality rate for the homeless, (Adams

!

48!
!

!
et al., 2007) which further increases the impact of the problem of homelessness on the public
health domain. Since homeless veterans are overrepresented in the homeless population in the
United States, they are at an even greater risk than their nonveteran counterparts (Fargo et al.,
2012). Additionally, veterans suffer from higher rates of chronic disease and co-morbidities than
the general population (Goldstein et al., 2008). This creates an additional burden on homeless
veterans because they are competing for resources such as shelter, food, and safety while
potentially battling a chronic health condition.
Homeless individuals in general experience a significant amount of unmet healthcare
service needs. This includes medical or surgical care, prescription medications, mental health
care, eyeglasses, and dental care (Baggett et al., 2010). However, homeless veterans have a
significant advantage over their nonveteran counterparts in that they have access to the VA
system. A multitude of services are available, yet many veterans choose not to access the system
because of patient-related and institutional barriers. Institutional barriers are not limited to the
VA system, but can also be found at civilian institutions across the United States.
In order to improve the overall health of homeless veterans, and the homeless in general,
various studies were analyzed to find the best practices to move the issue forward and improve
the public health framework. Noteworthy recommendations include using a more
comprehensive, integrated approach to medical and psychiatric treatment, and combing resources
in one geographical location. By providing a comprehensive approach to care more services can
be tailored to the population’s specific needs and lead to increase timeliness and efficiency. The
co-location of resources increases patient’s access and engagement in their care. These
recommendations can be applicable to not only homeless veterans but are generalizable across

!

49!
!

!
all homeless populations because whether they served in the military or not their need for
healthcare is the same.
From the review of the literature it is understood that there are multiple ways to increase
the health status of homeless veterans and improve their overall quality of life. However, since
many homeless veterans are not utilizing their VA benefits, and multiple barriers to care exist,
there is still a large population of veterans with poor health status who live without permanent
housing on a daily basis. This study provides a better understand of the process by which
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems from their unique first-person
perspective. Knowledge obtained from the study can lead to a decrease in both the financial
burden and patient safety issue of overcrowding placed on emergency care areas where
individuals who are homeless often seek their medical care (Trzeciak & Rivers, 2003; Kushel et
al., 2002; Ku et al., 2010). According to the reviewed literature, the emergency department is not
the long-term answer for treatment of chronic health problems in veterans who are homeless.
The high usage of the emergency department leads to overcrowding and unsafe conditions while
also increasing the financial burden placed on the hospital and community since emergency care
is extremely costly (Ku et al., 2010).
Additionally, this study highlights awareness about the healthcare needs of this unique
subpopulation whether it is directing and educating veterans who are homeless on alternative
comprehensive services or the need for a special innovative system to reduce and prevent
negative disease related outcomes. From the literature we know that comprehensive and colocated primary care services may improve overall health of veterans who are homeless (BlueHowells et al., 2008; Kertesz et al., 2013; O’Toole et al., 2013; O’Toole et al., 2010) but that
many are not utilizing these services or they are not available to them. Study results may

!

50!
!

!
demonstrate better ways to influence veterans about the importance of using primary or
ambulatory care services to provide them with more comprehensive care.
Furthermore, results from this study influence the need for future research on how
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems and potentially further increase a
homeless person’s quality of life. By gaining a better understanding of the process by which
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems, clinicians and stakeholders can work to
reduce their high mortality rates (Schanzer et al., 2007) and increase their overall health status by
reducing the need to compromise their health status for other basic necessities.
Finally, since the current administration of the United States has set an initiative of
ending chronic and veteran homelessness (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness, 2010)
much needed national attention is focused on this vulnerable population. Recently, the VA
secretary, Robert A. McDonald, announced that an additional $300 million in grants will be
awarded to help 115,000 at risk and homeless veterans and their families as part of the
eliminating veteran homelessness initiative (VA, 2014). Ultimately, this contributes to the
current knowledge base about the phenomenon and significantly assists in the challenging
endeavor of ending chronic and veteran homelessness.

!

51!
!

!
CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the research method that was used to answer the
qualitative research question. Grounded theory was selected as the appropriate research method
to determine the process by which homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems. The
historical roots of grounded theory are discussed followed by key aspects of grounded theory and
how it served as the best methodology to answer the research question. Additionally, this chapter
includes a description of the population under study, the inclusion and exclusion criteria, a
description of the sample, data collection, and data analysis procedures.
Grounded Theory
Grounded theory is a methodology that is based on the views of two sociologists who
wanted to direct attention to generating theory rather than solely theory testing and verification
(Glaser & Strauss, 1967). Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss had opposing personal
philosophical views and were educated by different schools of thought. Glaser came from
Columbia University while Strauss was educated at the University of Chicago. In order to create
grounded theory Glaser and Strauss were able to successfully merge their philosophical
traditions of positivism and pragmatism while being influenced by the philosophical idea of
symbolic interactionism (Annells, 1996). Glaser and Strauss saw the need for theory that is
“grounded” in the research data rather than deduced from a hypothesis and is able to explain real
world phenomenon (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Symbolic interactionism is not only a theory of human behavior but is also about group
behavior and human conduct (Annells, 1996). The term of ‘symbolic interactionism’ was coined
by Herbert Blumer (1937) and emphasizes the usage of sensitizing concepts that increase
significance through resulting relationship patterns (Heath & Cowley, 2004). Blumer viewed

!

52!
!

!
human beings as active agents in their own lives and therefore open to social interactions that
produce changes through emerging processes. As a result, human beings interact with one
another and produce patterned relationships that can be constantly compared which results in a
meaningful mode of inquiry (Annells, 1996; Health & Cowley, 2004).
Variations of grounded theory
Since the original development of grounded theory other variations have emerged. These
variations mainly stem from the philosophical underpinnings of grounded theory. Classic
grounded theory is considered to be the method originally developed by Glaser and Strauss and
essentially follows a post-positivist philosophy that allows the researcher to remain independent
of the participants in attempting to get as close to the truth as possible (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011).
Straussian grounded theory is an approach that resulted from the separation of the Glaser and
Strauss team and relies primarily on the philosophy of pragmatism and the researchers own
personal experience in determining the area of study (Hunter, Murphy, Grealish, Casey, &
Keady, 2011). Additionally, Straussian grounded theory requires an active relationship between
the researcher and the participants. The most recent re-modeling of grounded theory is the
constructivist approach by Kathy Charmaz (2006). This adaptation of grounded theory uses the
constructivist paradigm to gain meaning and understanding from the data through the coconstruction of reality by the researcher and the participants (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011).
Grounded theory requires a close relationship between data collection and data analysis
to produce explanatory models of human behavior that are grounded in the data (Charmaz,
2006). Induction, deduction, and verification all take place throughout the grounded theory
process in order to generate a new theory based on a particular phenomenon under study (Heath
& Cowley, 2004). Grounded theory requires that the systematic collection of data, sampling, and

!

53!
!

!
analysis occur simultaneously while theoretical sampling and data collection occur as the new
theory emerges. The technique of comparative analysis is used to continually compare the
concepts developing from the data. This action of constantly comparing the concepts allows the
researcher to note similarities and differences found in the data and eventually generates
categories that are able to aid in explaining the phenomenon and increase its overall generality
and explanatory power (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). These verified conceptual categories are then
used to generate hypotheses about the relationships that exist between the categories and indicate
the direction of further data collection and analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). There are various
key characteristics that define the grounded theory method such as comparative analysis,
theoretical sampling, theoretical saturation, theoretical memos, and theoretical sensitivity.
Comparative analysis
In classic Glaser and Strauss (1967) grounded theory methodology, emphasis is placed on
using comparative analysis to constantly compare the developing concepts from the data. These
concepts are generated from a series of facts that are found or replicated throughout the data. The
constant comparison of the similarities and differences between the facts generates the categories
and their properties that are able to increase explanatory power and generality (Glaser & Strauss,
1967). These verified conceptual categories and properties are then used to generate a hypothesis
about the relationship(s) that exist between the categories and properties. This is one of the main
reasons that the theory generated using grounded theory methodology is defined as “grounded”
in the data. The emerging core categories are indicated by the resulting data and indicate the
direction of further data collection and data analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Theoretical sampling

!

54!
!

!
Theoretical sampling is a strategy used in the grounded theory process to allow for
presentation of the best cases of the phenomenon under study and creates a system of checks and
balances on emerging categories. This controlled and purposive process of data collection is
based on the emerging theory rather than selective sampling as initially used in grounded theory
(Draucker, Martsolf, Ross, & Rusk, 2007). Participants are chosen based on their knowledge of
the topic and the need of the researcher to continually verify the newly developing theory by
increasing the relationships between categories and properties with the new data found by
sampling not only purposefully but theoretically as well. The iterative relationship of induction
and deduction can be visible through the process of theoretical sampling. The inductive process
involves the actual emerging theory that is grounded in the data while the deductive process is
present in the theoretical selection of samples (participants) to verify the resulting theory that is
emerging from the data (Becker, 1993).
Theoretical saturation
Glaser and Strauss (1967) describe theoretical saturation as reaching the point of
replication where no additional data are being found and therefore the properties of the category
can be fully developed. Complete theoretical saturation fills in the various gaps in the theory by
maximizing differences between groups and maximizing variations in the data. This is achieved
through comparative analysis and theoretical sampling by using “slices of data” to provide
alternative views when looking at categories and their properties (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). These
differing or alternative views are continuously tested and validated in order to help to generate
the properties of categories and fill in the various gaps in the theory while helping to reach
saturation.
Theoretical memos

!

55!
!

!
Another important aspect of grounded theory includes memo writing and the
development of theoretical memos in order to create integration of the data and keep track of
theoretical ideas (Strauss, 1987). Initial memos are written congruently with data collection and
analysis and then more advanced memos are written as the categories develop. Theoretical
memos are used to advance and link theoretical ideas that eventually contribute to the
development of the theory (Strauss, 1987).
Theoretical sensitivity
Maintaining theoretical sensitivity throughout the grounded theory process allows the
researcher to remain sensitive to the data and allowing the categories and properties to emerge
rather than having a priori hypotheses or biases about potential outcomes (Glaser, 1978).
Theoretical sensitivity can be increased by professional experience, immersion into the literature,
and becoming familiar with common ideas about the phenomenon under study. Since grounded
theory requires the systematic collection and analyzing of data, categories tend to emerge very
quickly. Therefore, the constant fitting and refitting of data and widespread knowledge of the
phenomenon ensures that all the data are explained and best fit in the resulting categories (Hoare,
Mills & Francis, 2012). Theoretical sensitivity should be preserved throughout the entire
grounded theory process in order to develop a comprehensive formal theory.
The population of veterans being addressed in this research study shared the same
fundamental problem of being homeless while also suffering from some chronic health problem.
This is “real world” phenomenon as described by Glaser and Strauss (1967) that can be
explained by the data generated through the grounded theory research process. The aim was to
determine how homeless veterans resolve the problem of disease management through a social
or psychological process. The researcher used the techniques of constant comparison, theoretical

!

56!
!

!
sampling, reached theoretical saturation, wrote memos, and maintained theoretical sensitivity.
The method of grounded theory was a tool used to develop a theory describing and explaining
the process by which veterans who are homeless manage their chronic health problems.
Protection of Human Subjects
This study was submitted to the institutional review board (IRB) at the University of
Cincinnati and the Research and Development Committee at the Cincinnati VA Medical Center
for approval of the protection of human subjects prior to any recruitment of participants or
collection of data. Written consent from each participant was obtained prior to any interviews
taking place.
Sample
The sample for this study was drawn from homeless male veterans with a diagnosed
chronic health problem. Female veterans were excluded because of their extremely low
representation of 9.8% in the homeless veteran population while males make up 90.2% (Pearl,
2013). Veterans from all military service periods (i.e. Vietnam, Korea, Persian Gulf,
Iraq/Afghanistan) were eligible for inclusion. Key informants with extensive knowledge of the
homeless such as health providers and social workers from the Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) and the surrounding community were also recruited into the study.
Inclusion Criteria
•! Male veteran (self-disclosed)
•! Homeless
•! Previously diagnosed chronic health problem
•! 18+ years of age
Exclusion Criteria

!

57!
!

!
•! Female veteran
•! Not currently homeless as defined by VA
•! Under the influence of substance that hinders ability to actively participate in the study as
determined by orientation (i.e. person, place, time, situation)
Homeless veterans were recruited from within the Veterans Health Administration and
from the surrounding community. Within the VA system is a system of homeless veteran
supportive services that includes programs such as VA supported housing (HUD-VA), Veterans
Justice Outreach, and health are for re-entry veterans (HCRV) (HUD & VA, 2010; Tsai et al.,
2013). Additionally, the homeless are more likely to use emergency rooms than their housed
counterparts (O’Toole et al., 2010). Therefore, homeless veterans were recruited at the
Cincinnati Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) through the emergency department with
the use of detailed flyers. Knowledge experts such as social workers and healthcare providers for
the homeless were also recruited at the VAMC as key informants.
Since it is estimated that only 10-20% of veterans actually use VA medical services
(Agha et al., 2000; Goldstein et al., 2008) and therefore potentially lack any healthcare services,
participants were also recruited from the surrounding community. Homeless veterans were
recruited in the community from one Cincinnati area soup kitchen that primarily serves the
homeless population and one Cincinnati emergency male shelter. Knowledge experts that
frequently provide social services and healthcare to the homeless in the community were
recruited from the shelter.
Our Daily Bread is a soup kitchen in the Cincinnati Over-the-Rhine area that provides
almost 200,000 meals annually for the poor and homeless. This particular organization has been
established for over twenty-five years and also provides social services and entertainment to its

!

58!
!

!
guests (Our Daily Bread). The Shelterhouse (formerly the Drop Inn Center) is the largest
emergency shelter for men in Hamilton County, providing shelter and services to over 2,200 men
and women (Ester Marie Hatton Center for Women) experiencing homelessness (Drop Inn
Center, 2009).
Procedures
Participants were recruited through the use of detailed flyers hung at the Cincinnati VA
Medical Center and both community locations. Additionally, the principal investigator recruited
face-to-face at the soup kitchen by being present during the designated meal times and special
activities. Finally, recruitment occurred at the shelter during the bimonthly veteran specific
meetings. The flyers included general information about the study and necessary contact
information if interested in participating. Veterans interested in participating received face-toface informed consent by the principal investigator before any information was obtained or data
collected. Purposive sampling followed by theoretical sampling was used to recruit 34
participants into the study. Four knowledge experts who provide social services and healthcare
within the VA and in the community were also recruited.
Data Collection
Recruited participants were screened for inclusion into the grounded theory study at the
Cincinnati VA Medical Center and the community locations. The principal investigator
conducted the participant screenings based on the inclusion criteria. All eligible participants were
consented in person and received a copy of the consent form before data collection began.
Participants were asked to complete a demographic form after consent (appendix A). Semistructured interviews were used to collect data (appendix B and C). The initial general open
research question used was “how do you manage your chronic health problems?” Follow up

!

59!
!

!
questions were also used to generate further data and expand upon concepts as they emerged in
the grounded theory study. A digital audio recorder was used to record the interview to ensure no
data were lost.
Field notes and observations served as additional data in this study. Participants were
informed ahead of time about the use of note taking during the interview by the principal
investigator. Field notes were used to allow the researcher to follow up with any clarifying
questions and record any general impressions of the environment and/or the participant.
Observations were made throughout the interviews to observe any obvious physical signs of
illness, facial expressions, and body language that occurred and assisted the principal
investigator and research team in analyzing the data.
Participant Incentive
For participation in the study homeless veterans received a $35 gift card at the conclusion
of the interview. This incentive to the homeless is supported by data that states “payment in
kind” to homeless research participants should be avoided because coercion with goods reduces
their autonomy and they should therefore receive a monetary incentive as other research
participants would (Schonfeld et al., 2003). Participants whose interviews took place at the soup
kitchen also received a meal at the time of the interview since it coincided with the designated
mealtime at the soup kitchen. Knowledge experts recruited into the study received a $35 gift card
for their participation.
Data Management
After the first interview was completed, the interview was transcribed, and a number
assigned to the participant. All audio taped interviews were sent to a transcription company
familiar with transcription of research data to be transcribed into text for coding of the data.

!

60!
!

!
Transcribed interviews were re-checked against audio recordings by the principal investigator to
check for errors. All data was stored behind the protected VA firewall at the Cincinnati VA
Medical Center and on the protected Research drive at the University of Cincinnati, College of
Nursing. Participants’ personal information was de-identified to ensure privacy and
confidentiality. Consent forms were locked in the Research and Development office at the
Cincinnati VA Medical Center. Demographic forms will be entered with the beginning of each
participant transcript and then scanned and destroyed. Verbatim transcripts were uploaded to
MAXQDA (2015) for ease of coding and analyzing by the researcher and team. A hard copy of
each de-identified transcript was kept for initial coding and then destroyed.
Data Analysis
The analysis of the qualitative data in this grounded theory study required an active
iterative process in which the researcher moves back and forth from data collection to data
analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). The principal investigator and research team completed
coding as described by Glaser (1978) as substantive coding initially and then theoretical coding.
The basic rule in coding is that while coding a transcript for raw data to place in various
categories, there must be comparison between new and previously coded data in that particular
category and other categories (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Substantive coding
Substantive coding included open coding and selective coding. Open coding is the
process of coding the data in all possible ways for as many categories that may fit (Glaser, 1978).
Line-by-line coding was the technique used during open coding. The principal investigator and
one nurse faculty member of the research team met weekly to code one interview per week for
the first 4 interviews and then moved to selective coding. Selective coding is defined by the

!

61!
!

!
principal investigator and the research team looking for data that fit with a list of sixteen
identified core categories. Weekly team meetings continued with a discussion around the core
categories of which some were collapsed and expanded upon. The the principal investigator and
research team moved on to theoretical coding.
Theoretical coding
Theoretical coding is a way to conceptualize substantive codes and describe them in a
theoretical way that explains the data. Theoretical codes emerge from the data through
comparative analysis and can be applicable to multiple perspectives depending on their
combination (Glaser, 1978). Theoretical coding allowed the principal investigator and the
research team to ask multiple questions of the data and determine the various trajectories of the
data set. As the construction of the most parsimonious explanation about what was seen in the
data occurred, theoretical sampling was used to obtain further data to explain the emerging
theory. Theorizing involved recognizing beliefs and values in the data, examining similar
concepts in various settings, inductively developing theory from the data, and formulating
hypotheses about the links or experiences in the data set.
During the selective coding process, the qualitative software MAXQDA was used to
assist with coding. MAXQDA is a tool to help store and sort the data. As more interviews were
completed the previously described multi-step coding process was repeated for each transcript.
Memos were also used throughout the study to keep track of ideas and help the principal
investigator and the research team to formulate the emerging theory. They provided an outlet
with no constraints to write ideas, thoughts, and potential insights into the phenomenon under
study. Early memos were simple texts but became more abstract as the study unfolded.
Additionally, they helped to generate further questions and hypotheses about the emerging data

!

62!
!

!
and allowed the research team to remain immersed in the data in order to continue the constant
movement between data collection and data analysis (Glaser, 1978).
Finally, the last step in data analysis was recontextualization. This involved the
development of a theory that is applicable in other contexts and to other populations. The
ultimate goal of this grounded theory study was to develop a theory that describes and explains
the process by which homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems.
Ensuring Rigor
Trustworthiness or validity of the qualitative study was ensured through the use of a
research team including the principal investigator, faculty mentor, additional faculty member,
and one nursing student. Inter-subjective agreement ensures credibility along with the use of
direct quotes from participants in the research findings (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). Transferability
was ensured by the adequate description of the sample and dependability of the data can be
fulfilled with the re-checking of the audiotapes against the transcripts. Additionally,
confirmability was ensured in this grounded theory study by the creation of an “audit trail”
through the use of memos that described theoretical decisions and ideas that came from the data
(Denzin & Lincoln, 2011).
Research Team
The research team consisted of the principal investigator, a faculty mentor (dissertation
chair) from University of Cincinnati College of Nursing, two additional committee members
who are faculty from the College of Nursing and School of Social Work, and a BSN honors
nursing student who is in the military.
Protection of Human Subjects

!

63!
!

!
This study was submitted to the institutional review board (IRB) at the University of
Cincinnati and the Research and Development Committee at the Cincinnati VA Medical Center
for approval of the protection of human subjects prior to any recruitment of participants or
collection of data. Verbal and written consent from each participant was obtained prior to any
interviews taking place in a private setting at each recruitment location. In addition, participants
were reminded of the voluntary nature of their participation.

!

64!
!

!
References
Agha, Z., Lofgren, R.P., VanRuiswyk, J.V. & Layde, P.M. (2000). Are patients at veterans
affairs medical center sicker. Archives of Internal Medicine, 160, 3252-3257.
Adams, J., Rosenheck, R., Gee, L., Seibyl, C.L. & Kushel, M. (2007). Hospitalized younger: a
comparison of a national sample of homeless and housed inpatient veterans. Journal of
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 18, 173-184.
Annells, M. (1996). Grounded theory method: philosophical perspectives, paradigm of inquiry,
and postmodernism. Qualitative Health Research, 6(3), 379-393.
Applewhite, S.L. (1997). Homeless veterans: perspectives on social services use. Social Work,
42(1), 19-30.
Baggett, T.P., O’Connell, J.J., Singer, D.E. & Rigotti, N.A. (2010). The unmet health care needs
of homeless adults: a national study. American Journal of Public Health, 100(7), 13261333.
Becker, P.H. (1993). Pearls, pith, and provocation. Qualitative Health Research, 3(2), 254-260.
Blue-Howells, J., McGuire, J. & Nakashima, J. (2008). Co-location of health care services for
homeless veterans: a case study of innovation program implementation. Social Work in
Health Care, 47(3), 219-231.
Chambers, C., Chiu, S., Katic, M., Kiss, A., Redelmeier, D.A., Levinson, W. & Hwang, S.W.
(2013). High utilitzers of emergency health services in a population-based cohort of
homeless adults. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), 302-310
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

!

65!
!

!
Chwastiak, L, Tsai, J. & Rosenheck, R. (2012). Impact of health insurance status and a diagnosis
of serious mental illness on whether chronically homeless individuals engage in primary
care. American Journal of Public Health, 102(12), 83-89.
Denzin, N.K. & Lincoln, Y.S. (2011). The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
DiPietro, B.Y., Kindermann, D. & Schenkel, S.M. (2012). Ill, itinerant and insured: the top 20
users of the emergency departments in baltimore city. The Scientific World Journal,
2012.
Doran, K.M., Raven, M.C. & Rosenheck R.A. (2013). What drives frequent emergency
department use in an integrated health system? National data from the veterans health
administration. Annuals of Emergency Medicine, 62(2), 151-159.
Doran, K.M., Vashi, A.A., Platis, S., Curry, L.A., Rowe, M., Gang, M. & Vaca, F.E. (2013).
Navigating the boundaries of emergency department care: addressing the medical and
social needs of patients who are homeless. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2),
S355-S360.
Draucker, C.B., Martsolf, D.S., Ross, R. & Rusk, T.B. (2007). Theoretical sampling and
category development in grounded theory. Qualitative Health Research, 17(8), 11371148.
Drop Inn Center. (2009). Retrieved from http://www.dropinn.org
Fargo, J., Metraux, S., Byrne, T., Munley, E., Montgomery, A.E., Jones, H.,…Culhane, D.
(2012). Prevalence and risk of homelessness among us veterans. Preventing Chronic
Disease, 9.
Gilliss, C.L. (2010). Making a difference in the health care of veterans: 9 thinks you should
know. Nursing Outlook, 58, 276-278.

!

66!
!

!
Glaser, B.G. (1978). Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the Methodology of Grounded Theory.
Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B.G. & Strauss, A.L. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Chicago: Aldine.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Haas, G.L., Appelt, C.J. & Gordon, A.J. (2010). Factor structure and
risk factors for the health status of homeless veterans. Psychiatric Quarterly, 81, 311323.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Jacoby, A.M. & Haas, G.L. (2008). A taxonomy of medical
comorbidity for veterans who are homeless. The Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
Underserved, 19(3), 991-1005.
Hastings, S.N., Smith, V.A., Weinberger, M., Schmader, K.E., Olsen, M.K. & Oddone, E.Z.
(2011). Emergency department visits in veterans affairs medical facilities. The American
Journal of Managed Care, 17(6), 215-223.
Heath, H. & Crowley, S. (2004). Developing a grounded theory approach: a comparison of
Glaser and Strauss. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 41, 141-150.
Hibbs, J.R., Benner, L., Klugman, L., Spencer, R., Macchia, I., Mellinger, A.K. & Fife, D.
(1994). Mortality in a cohort of homeless adults in Philadelphia. The New England
Journal of Medicine, 331(5), 304-309.
Hoare, K.J., Mills, J. & Francis, K. (2012). Dancing with data: an example of acquiring
theoretical sensitivity in a grounded theory study. International Journal of Nursing
Practice, 18, 240-245.
Hunter, A., Murphy, K., Grealish, A., Casey, D. & Keady, J. (2011). Navigating the grounded
theory terrain. Part1. Nurse Researcher, 18(4), 6-10.

!

67!
!

!
Kertesz, S.G., Holt, C.L., Steward, J.L., Jones, R.N., Roth, D.L., Stringfellow, E.,…Pollio, D.E.
(2013). Comparing homeless persons’ care experiences in tailored versus nontailored
primary care programs. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S331-S339.
Ku, B.S., Scott, K.C., Kertesz, S.G. & Pitts, S.R. (2010). Factors associated with use of urban
emergency departments by the US homeless population. Public Health Reports, 125,
398-405.
Kuhn, R. & Culhane, D. (1998). Applying cluster analysis to test a typology of homelessness by
pattern of shelter utilization: results from the analysis of administrative data. American
Journal of Community Psychology, 26(2), 207-232.
Kushel, M.B., Perry, S., Bangsberg, D., Clark, R. & Moss, A.R. (2002). Emergency department
use among the homeless and marginally housed: results from a community based study.
American Journal of Public Health, 92(5), 778-784.
Kushel, M.B., Vittinghoff, E. & Haas, J.S. (2001). Factors associated with the health care
utilization of homeless persons. Journal of the American Medical Association, 285(2),
200-206.
Lee, B.A., Tyler, K.A. & Wright, J.D. (2010). The new homelessness revisited. Annual Review
of Sociology, 36, 501-521.
Mandelberg, J.H., Kuhn, R.E. & Kohn, M.A. (2000). Epidemiologic analysis of an urban, public
emergency department’s frequent users. Academic Emergency Medicine, 7, 637-646.
McCormack, D. & MacIntosh, J. (2001). Research with homeless people uncovers a model of
health. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 23, 679-697.
McGuire, J., Gelberg, L., Blue-Howells, J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2009). Access to primary care
for homeless veterans with serious mental illness or substance abuse: a follow-up

!

68!
!

!
evaluation of co-located primary care and homeless social services. Administration,
Policy and Mental Health, 36, 255-264.
Montgomery, A.E., Hill, L.L., Kane, V. & Culhane, D.P. (2013). Housing chronically homeless
veterans: evaluating the efficacy of a housing first approach to HUD-VASH. Journal of
Community Psychology, 41(4), 505-514.
National Alliance to End Homelessness. (2013). The state of homelessness in america 2013.
National Healthcare for the Homeless Council. (2014). Retrieved from
http://www.nhchc.org/faq/official-definition-homelessness/
Nyamathi, A., Sands, H., Pattatucci-Aragon, A., Berg, J., Leake, B., Hahn, J.E. & Morisky, D.
(2003). Perception of health status by homeless us veterans. Family Community Health,
27(1), 65-74.
O’Reilly, M. & Parker, N. (2012). ‘Unsatisfactory saturation: a critical exploration of saturated
sample sizes in qualitative research. Qualitative Research, 13(2), 190-197.
O’Toole, T.P., Bourgault, C., Johnson, E.E., Redihan, S.G., Borgia, M., Aiello, R. & Kane, V.
(2013). New to care: demands on a health system when homeless veterans are enrolled in
a medical model home. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S374-S379.
O’Toole, T.P., Buckel, L., Bourgault, C., Blumen, J., Redihan, S.G., Jiang, L., & Friedmann, P.
(2010). Applying the chronic care model to homeless veterans: effect of a population
approach to primary care on utilization and clinical outcomes. American Journal of
Public Health, 100(12), 2493-2499.
O’Toole, T.P., Conde-Martel, A., Gibbon, J.L., Hanusa, B.H. & Fine, M.J. (2003). Health care of
homeless veterans: why are some individuals falling through the safety net? Journal of
General Internal Medicine, 18, 929-933.

!

69!
!

!
O’Toole, T.P., Gibbon, J.L., Hanusa, B.H. & Fine, M.J. (1999). Utilization of health care
services among subgroups of urban homeless and housed poor. Journal of Health
Politics, Policy and Law, 24(1), 91-114.
O’Toole, T.P., Pirraglia, P.A., Dosa, D., Bourgault, C. Redihan, S., O’Toole, M.B. & Blumen, J.
(2011). Building care systems to improve access for high-risk and vulnerable veteran
populations. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 26, 683-688.
Parker, R.D. & Dykema, S. (2013). The reality of homeless mobility and implications for
improving care. Journal of Community Health, 38, 685-689.
Perl, L. (2012). Veterans and homelessness. Congressional Research Service.
Perl, L. (2015). Veterans and homelessness. Congressional Research Service.
Ropers, R.H. & Boyer, R. (1987). Perceived health status among the new urban homeless. Social
Science & Medicine, 24(8), 669-678.
Rosenheck, R. & Fontana, A. (1994). A model of homelessness among male veterans of the
Vietnam war generation. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 151(3), 421-427.
Schanzer, B., Dominguez, B., Shrout, P.E. & Canton, C.L.M. (2007). Homelessness, health
status, and health care use. American Journal of Public Health, 97(3), 464-469.
Schonfeld, T.L., Brown, J.S., Weniger, M. & Gordon, B. (2003). Research involving the
homeless: arguments against payment-in-kind (PinK). IRB: Ethics & Human Research,
25(5), 17-20.
Shelton, K.H., Taylor, P.J., Bonner, A. & van den Bree, M. (2009). Risk factors for
homelessness: evidence from a population-based study. Psychiatric Services, 60(4), 465472.
Strauss, A.L. (1987). Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. Cambridge University Press.

!

70!
!

!
Tessler, R., Rosenheck, R. & Gamache, G. (2002). Comparison of homeless veterans with other
homeless men in a large clinical outreach program. Psychiatric Quarterly, 73(2), 109119.
Trzeciak, S. & Rivers, E.P. (2003). Emergency department overcrowding in the United States:
An emerging threat to patient safety and public health. Emergency Medicine Journal, 20,
402-405.
Tsai, J., Doran, K.M. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2013). When health insurance is not a factor: national
comparison of homeless and nonhomeless us veterans who use veterans affairs
emergency departments. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S225-S231.
Tsai, J., Kasprow, W.J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2013). Latent homeless risk profiles of a national
sample of homeless veterans and their relation to program referral and admission
patterns. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S239-S247.
Tsai, J., Mares, A.S. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2012). Do homeless veterans have the same needs and
outcomes as non-veterans? Military Medicine, 177(1), 27-31).
Tsai, J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2013). Risk factors for ED use among homeless veterans. American
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 31, 855-858.
Tsai, J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2014). Uninsured veterans who will need to obtain insurance
coverage under the patient protection and affordable care act. American Journal of Public
Health, 104(3), e57-e62.
US Department of Housing and Urban Development. (2010). The 2010 annual homeless
assessment report to congress.

!

71!
!

!
US Department of Housing and Urban Development & US Department of Veterans Affairs.
(2010). Veteran homelessness: a supplemental report to the 2010 annual homeless
assessment report to congress.
US Department of Veterans Affairs: Office of Inspector General. (2012). Homeless incidence
and risk factors for becoming homeless in veterans.
US Interagency Council on Homelessness. (2010). Opening doors: Federal strategic plan to
prevent and end homelessness.
VA announces new grants to help end veteran homelessness. (2014, August). VA Office of
Public and Intergovernmental Affairs. Retrieved from
http://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id=2606
Wen, C.K., Hudak, P.L. & Hwang, S.W. (2007). Homeless people’s perceptions of welcomeness
and unwelcomeness in healthcare encounters. Society of General Internal Medicine, 22,
1011-1017.
Wilson, N.J. & Kizer, K.W. (1997). The va health care system: an unrecognized national safety
net. Health Affairs, 16(4), 200-204.
Zezima, K. (2014, May 30). Everything you need to know about the VA and the scandals
engulfing it. The Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www.washingtonpost.com

!

72!
!

!

Literature Review Tables
Homelessness: Background & Health Status
Citation
Baggett,
O’Connell,
Singer &
Rigotti, 2010
The unmet health
care needs of
homeless adults:
a national study

Kertesz, Holt,
Steward, Jones,
Roth,
Stringfellow,

!

Research
Question

Method

Sample Size
/Population

Measurements

Variables
of
Interest

Significant
Findings

Recommendations

To assess the
prevalence and
predictors of pastyear unmet needs
for 5 types of
health care
services in a
national sample
of homeless
adults.

Secondary
analysis of the
2003 Health Care
for the Homeless
(HCH) User
Survey.

3 stage sampling
design.
30 HCH grantees
(79 clinic sites)
33 interviews per
grantee site
966 respondents
age 18 or older

Chi square to
determine unadjusted
relationships b/w
predictor and
outcome variables.

Predisposing
factors,
enabling
factors and
need factors
(per
behavioral
model for
vulnerable
populations)

73% of respondents
reported at least one
unmet health need:
inability to obtain
needed medical or
surgical care,
prescription
medications, mental
health care,
eyeglasses, and dental
care.
Significant predictors
of unmet needs
include food
insufficiency, out-ofhome placement as a
minor, vision
impairment and lack
of health insurance.
Past year employment
is associated with
unmet needs for
medical or surgical
care and prescription
medications. Confirms
that when employment
is sole source of
income in poverty
setting patients often
prioritize work over
health.
Patient-clinician
relationship and
perceptions of
cooperation among

Substantial barriers for
homeless adults exist in
accessing multiple
dimensions of health care.

Compared
homeless
patients’
experiences of

Nationally
representative
survey of
individuals using
clinical services
provided by the
federally funded
HCH program.

Survey based
comparison of
patient
experiences of

Random sample
of homelessexperienced
English speaking

Multivariable logistic
regression to
determine factors
independently
associated with each
outcome measure of
unmet need among
all adults.

Use of Primary Care
Quality-Homeless
(PCQ-H) Survey
previously

73!
!

Patientclinician
relationship

Health services
compatible with work
schedules and delivered
in a flexible format will
be required to best serve
homeless people who rely
on employment as a
source of income.
Incorporating vision
services for the homeless
into health care model
may alleviate the burden
of vision impairment and
enhance functionality and
improve access to other
dimensions of care for the
homeless.

Tailored primary care
service delivery is
associated with superior
service experience for

!
Gordon, Kim,
Austin, Henry,
Johnson,
Granstaff,
O’Connell,
Golden, Young,
Davis & Pollio,
2013
Comparing
homeless
persons’ care
experiences in
tailored versus
non-tailored
primary care
programs

care in health care
organizations that
differed in their
degree of primary
care design
service tailoring

Kuhn &
Culhane, 1998
Applying cluster
analysis to test a
typology of
homelessness by
pattern of shelter
utilization: results
from the analysis
of administrative
data

To test a typology
of homelessness
using
administrative
data on public
shelter use in
New York City
(1988-1995) and
Philadelphia
(1991-1995).

!

primary care at 5
federally funded
sites that differed
in the degree to
which primary
care service
delivery was
tailored for the
homeless.

persons who
received primary
care from each
site of care.

40-60 minute
survey conducted
face-to-face

870 successfully
contacted and
screened

6371 persons met
criteria

developed.
3 phases of analysis
using chi square,
ANOVA and
regression

2584 recruited

Cooperation
among
clinicians
Accessibility
or
coordination
Homelessspecific needs

601 included in
analysis
Cluster analysis
used to produce
three groups by
number of shelter
days and number
of shelter episodes
from
administrative
databases.

Utilizers of
shelter system in
NYC and
Philadelphia

Technique of nearest
centroid sorting to
construct unique
clusters when given
set number of
clusters.
Transitional, episodic
and chronic clusters.
Sample size, average
number of episodes
and average number
days.

74!
!

Individual
episodes of
homelessness,
age,
education,
gender, race,
indicators for
mental health,
substance
abuse and
medical
problems.

providers were highest
where homelesstailoring was most
pronounced.
Higher levels of
tailoring associated
with a better
experience.
An unfavorable
experience was 1.5 to
2 times more common
at the mainstream VA
sites compared with
the tailored non-VA
site.
Three distinct clusters:
Transitionally
homeless
Episodically homeless
Chronically homeless
More evidence of
substance abuse
among chronic and
episodic shelter users
than transitionally.
Transitionally
homeless who
represent 80% of
shelter users are
generally younger,
less likely to have
mental health,
substance abuse or
medical problems and
to over-represent
whites.
The episodically
homeless represent
10% of shelter users,
are also comparatively
young but are more
likely to be non-white

patients who experience
homelessness.
More research to better
understand which aspects
of service tailoring matter
most and whether they
can be translated across
service environments for
both homeless and nonhomeless populations.

Program planning for the
homeless would benefit
from using the typologies
described to gear services
to the specific type of
shelter users and how
their patterns of
homelessness effect their
daily living.

!

Kushel,
Vittinghoff &
Haas, 2001
Factors
associated with
the health care
utilization of
homeless persons

To describe
factors associated
with use of and
perceived barriers
to receipt of
health care among
homeless persons.

Descriptive.
Secondary data
analysis of the
National Survey
of Homeless
Assistance
Providers and
Clients.

2874 currently
homeless persons
interviewed
through homeless
assistance
programs
throughout the
US in Oct-Nov
1996

Bivariate
relationships b/w
independent variables
and 5 outcome
variables.
Multivariate logistic
models based on
significant bivariate
relationships and a
priori data

Self-reported
ambulatory
care services,
emergency
departments
and inpatient
hospital
services.
Inability to
receive
necessary
care.

Lee, Tyler &
Wright, 2010
The new
homelessness
revisited

!

Focus on (a)
conceptual
questions
surrounding
homelessness, (b)
homeless

Sociological
review

Homeless
population

N/A

75!
!

Inability to
comply with
prescription
medication in
the prior year
N/A

and to have mental
health, substance
abuse and medical
problems.
The chronically
homeless account for
10% of shelter users
tend to be older, nonwhite and have higher
levels of mental
health, substance
abuse and medical
problems.
Chronically homeless
consume half of the
total shelter days
despite their small
number.
Homeless persons
reported high rates of
acute hospital based
care, low rates of
ambulatory care and
difficulty accessing
health care.
Association b/w
insurance status and
increased use of
ambulatory care and
decreased barriers to
care (medical
insurance enables the
use of ambulatory care
and decreases barriers
to care).
Homeless persons are
more likely to use EDs
than the population as
a whole.
A look at macro and
micro level causes of
homelessness;
examination of public,
media and
governmental

Having insurance is
consistently associated
with improved access to
care.
By improving provision
of medical insurance
among the homeless it
could significantly
decrease high rates of ED
use and inpatient
hospitalizations and
improve morbidity among
the homeless.

Need for greater
emphasis on prevention
that could help strengthen
research/policy agenda
for homelessness.

!

O’Toole,
Gibbon, Hanusa
& Fine, 1999
Utilization of
health care
services among
subgroups of
urban homeless
and housed poor

Schanzer,
Dominguez,
Shrout &
Canton, 2007
Homelessness,
health status and
health care use

!

population size,
composition and
distribution, (c)
homeless people’s
life chances, (d)
coping strategies
employed to meet
basic needs, (e)
explanations for
homelessness, (f)
public views and
media coverage
and (g) actions
taken to address
homelessness
To describe the
health services
utilization
patterns of a
homeless
population
classified by their
sheltering
arrangements
over the previous
six months.

Aim to describe
the health status
and health care us
of new clients of
homeless shelters
and observe
changes in these
health indicators
over the study
period.

responses to the
homeless problem;
policy that has
influenced
homelessness in the
US.

Cross-sectional
survey of
homeless and
housed poor
adults in
Allegheny county,
PA

Subjects from 24
sites throughout
city of Pittsburgh
and Allegheny
County.
399 individuals
completed survey

Comparisons using
chi-square test for
categorical variables
ANOVA used for
comparisons of
continuous variables

Demographic
characteristics
, comorbid
illnesses,
functional
status and
social support
networks,
reasons for
homelessness
and health
services
utilization.

Longitudinal
study.
Followed
individuals from
entry into
homeless shelter
system for the
next 18 months.
Baseline
interviews,

445 newly
homeless
individuals over
18 month period
in NYC.
Both men and
women aged 18
to 65 yrs.
Follow-up data
collected on 351

Demographic data
and info on living
arrangements,
homelessness hx,
current housing
status, education,
employment, marital
status, citizenship,
and respondents’
reports of medical

Baseline
general health
status of
newly
homeless and
follow-up
health status
after 18
months.

76!
!

Study indicates that
the majority of
homeless and housedpoor utilized health
services during the six
month period.
Unsheltered are
homeless longer and
were less well
educated and less
often employed and
had lower levels of
social support.
Resource use is
associated with
sheltering
arrangement,
comorbid conditions,
race, social support
and insurance status.
Some aspects of
participants’ health
status showed
improvement with
those who obtained
housing showing more
positive changes.
Those that found
housing had
significant decrease in

By improving the
structure and stability of a
homeless person’s
sheltering status it could
lead to a decrease in
acute/episodic care
utilization and an increase
in preventative and
screening care.
Need for better
coordination and
integration of care to
increase access to and
utilization of treatment
for drug and alcohol
abuse and mental health
services.

Individuals who become
homeless bare a heavy
disease burden.
Those at risk of becoming
homeless contribute to
the overcrowding of EDs
and more than 1/3 of
newly homeless use the
ED as their usual source
of care.

!

Shelton, Taylor,
Bonner & van
den Bree, 2009
Risk factors for
homelessness:
evidence from a
population-based
study

!

To evaluate
relationships
between wellestablished
factors and
lifetime
homelessness
status and the
relative
importance of
these factors in
the prediction of
homelessness

follow-up
interviews and
monthly
telephone
contacts.

participants.

illnesses and
insurance status.
Medical Outcomes
Study 36-Item short
form health survey
used to evaluate
general physical and
mental health status.

Secondary data
analysis derived
from the National
Longitudinal
Study of
Adolescent Health
(Add Health).
Computer based
interviews
completed in
wave three 6
years after
adolescents had
enrolled in study.

Large
representative
population based
sample.
Primary sample
included all high
schools in the US
with an 11th grade
and at least 30
enrolled students.
For this study
systematic
random sample of
high schools
selected.
134 high schools
to represent
region, urbanity,
school type, size,
and racial and

Measures of risk
factors in the Add
Health In-Home
Adolescent
Interview:
-Adversity in
childhood
-socioeconomic
situation
-mental health
problem
-addiction problem
-criminal behavior

77!
!

Having ever
been
homeless for
a week or
longer.
Having stayed
in a homeless
shelter.
Where
currently
living.
Demographic
factors.

rates of high blood
pressure.
Sample consistently
had higher rates of
medical illness,
psychopathology
(depression & anxiety)
and substance use
disorders than
participants in similar
aged general
population.
Persons at risk of
becoming homeless
also stressed health
care system because
they sought help for
primary care (medical
and psychiatric)
problems in
emergency
departments instead of
outpatient clinics or
private offices.

Need to address issues
before homelessness
occurs.
Bringing services for
medical and psychiatric
care into the homeless
shelter system helps to
improve the overall
health status of the
homeless.
Neighborhood
interventions that
promote disease
prevention may be
beneficial to those who
are at risk of becoming
homeless.

Older age and Native
American ethnicity
significantly
associated with
homelessness.
The ever-homeless
group had elevated
levels of parentalcaregiver abuse or
neglect and almost
half had reported
having run away or
being ordered out of
their parents homes.
Higher rates of
violence and crime in
group that experienced
homelessness.
Childhood adversity is
significantly

Socioeconomic
disadvantage remains a
key linkage to
homelessness as a child
and an adult.
Closer attention needs to
be paid to children and
adolescents in order to
prevent homelessness in
adulthood.

!
ethnic
composition.
Respondents 1118 years of age.
Total: 14,888
respondents.
682 classified as
ever being
homeless.

!

associated with
homelessness among
young adults along
with economic
disadvantage, mental
illness and recent drug
use.
Academic
underachievement and
early socioeconomic
difficulty related to
homelessness.
Drug abuse more
strongly associated
with homelessness
than alcohol abuse.

78!
!

!
Homelessness & United States Veterans
Citation

Research
Question

Method

Sample
Size/

Adams,
Rosenheck,
Gee, Seibyl
and Kushel,
2007

Hypotheses:
Homeless
inpatients would
be younger than
housed inpatients
for all major
medical-surgical
diagnoses,
mirroring the
higher ageadjusted mortality
rate in homeless
populations.
Homeless
veterans would
have higher rates
of admission for
psychiatric and
substance abuse
diagnoses than
housed veterans.

Retrospective,
cross sectional
secondary data
analysis of
inpatient veterans
at Veterans Affairs
Medical Centers
(VAMC)
nationwide who
were hospitalized
on days that the
VAMC conducted
an annual housing
census.

48,868
hospitalized
veterans

To determine if
VA patients are
different from
non-VA patients
in terms of health
status and
medical resource
use.

Secondary analysis
of the “access to
care” supplement
of the national
health interview
survey (NHIS) for
the years 1993 and
1994

128,099 adult
respondents
used.
Four groups
identified: (1)
respondents who
identified
themselves as
veterans and
identified a VA

Measurements

Variables of
Interest

Significant
Findings

Recommendations

ICD-9 codes to
identify 15 most
common med-surg
diagnoses.

Housing status:
literally homeless,
double-up,
institution,
domiciled,
unknown.

Homeless subjects
were younger and
more likely to be
unmarried than
housed
counterparts.
More homeless had
a discharge
diagnosis of
substance abuse or
psychiatric disorder
than housed
inpatients.
The multifactorial
influence of mental
illness, substance
abuse and chaotic
social situations
create a situation
where homeless
people are more
susceptible to early
morbidity, high
hospitalization rates
and premature
death.

Interventions to improve
the health of homeless
should focus on common
diagnoses that afflict the
homeless population but
also attention should
focus on more common
diagnoses that lead to
hospitalizations at a
younger age.
More research is needed
to identify better ways to
overcome barriers in
access to care and to
identify populations at
high risk for homelessness
and poor health outcomes.
To decrease early medsurg hospitalizations
among the homeless,
policy efforts should
focus on chronic disease
management rather than
intervening once
hospitalized with
significant illness.

3 variables selected
to measure medical
resource use: (1)
number of
outpatient
physician visits in
the past year, (2)
number of shortterm care hospital
admissions in the

VA veterans had
the lowest level of
education, were
more likely to be
poor and more
likely to be
unemployed than
the general
population.
VA vets were 14.7

Findings suggest that
higher resource use by
VA patients is not a
reflection of
organizational factors or
inappropriate health
practices. Instead, higher
resource use is an
appropriate use of
resources by a patient

Population

Hospitalized
younger: a
comparison of a
national sample
of homeless
and housed
inpatient
veterans

Agha,
Lofgren,
VanRuiswyk
& Layde ,
2000
Are patients at
veterans affairs
medical centers
sicker?

!

Sociodemographic
factors.
Use chi-square test
Fischer’s exact test

Assessment of
health status based
on self-report of
health status and
chronic medical
conditions.
Self –report health
status measured on
Likert scale.

79!
!

!
hospital or clinic
as their usual
source of care
(VA Veterans),
(2) those who
identified as
veterans but
reported a nonVA facility as
their usual
source of care
(non-VA
veterans), (3)
those who
identified as
non-veterans
(general
population),
(4)those unsure
of either their
usual source of
medical care or
their veteran
status
(unknown).

Fargo,
Metraux,
Byrne,
Munley,
Montgomery,
Jones,
Sheldon, Kane
& Culhane,
2012
Prevalence and
risk of
homelessness
among US

!

Better
understanding of
the dynamics of
homelessness
among veterans.
Determining if
veteran status is
associated with an
increased risk of
homelessness and
identifying
whether risk of
homelessness

Homeless
Management
Information
Systems (HIMS)
and American
Community Survey
(ACS) data from 7
jurisdictions
provided basis for
estimating the
prevalence of
veterans in the
homeless, poverty

130,554 adults
received
homelessness
services
10,726 veterans
(8.2%)

Estimated
prevalence of
veterans in the
homeless, poverty
and overall
populations and
calculated
corresponding risk
ratios (RR).
Prevalence and RR
computed for each
age, race and sex
subgroup.

80!
!

past year, (3)
number of days
spent in the
hospital for shortterm care in the
past year.
Control variables:
age, sex, race,
educational status,
annual family
income,
employment status

times more likely to
have poor health
status than the
general population
and 14 times more
likely to have 5 or
more medical
conditions than the
general population.
After controlling
for confounding
variables (age, sex,
education, family
income, and
employment) VA
veterans still have
significantly poorer
health status and
more medical
conditions than the
general population.
Those who used the
VA health system
as their primary
source of care
reported poorer
health and had a
greater number of
medical conditions
than the general
population.

population that is older,
has poorer health status
and more medical
conditions than the
general population of
patients.
Investigators and policy
makers should not
compare VA care with
non-VA care based on
resource benchmarks such
as number of visits or
length of stay data,
without accounting for
differences between the
VA population and the
general population.

Veteran status
Homeless vs
poverty
Age, race, sex

Rates of
homelessness were
consistently higher
in veteran
populations than
nonveteran
populations.
Veteran status,
older age, and black
race were
significantly and
independently
associated with risk

Homeless veterans will
likely turn to the VA for
healthcare given their lack
of housing and heightened
susceptibility to chronic
health problems. This will
increase demand on the
VA for long term care
which will create the need
for further sustainable
programs that contribute
to the housing and health
of homeless veterans.

!
veterans

among veterans
varies as a
function of age,
race or sex.

and overall
populations.

Montgomery,
Hill, Kane &
Culhane, 2013

To determine
whether veterans
participating in a
Housing First
approach to
HUD-VASH
receive housing
more quickly,
maintain longterm housing
stability and
decrease the use
of more intensive
and expensive
health care
services such as
urgent care and
inpatient mental
health care,
compared with
veterans in a
TAU (traditional)
approach to
HUD-VASH

Naturalistic
demonstration
project compared
two groups of
veterans who were
experiencing
homelessness and
were admitted to a
HUD-VASH
program in a major
metropolitan area.

Housing
chronically
homeless
veterans:
evaluating the
efficacy of a
housing first
approach to
HUD-VASH

!

of homelessness
among both men
and women.
Male veterans were
almost 50% as
likely to be
homeless as
nonveterans in the
general population.
Veterans who are
living in poverty
are more vulnerable
to homelessness.
Housing first
group=107
TAU group=70
Housing first
received
consumer driven
case
management
program that
placed priority
on immediately
assisting the
veteran to secure
permanent
housing in
independent
apartments.
Veterans are
offered services
that include
social workers,
housing
specialist, access
to NP or
psychiatrist to
provide
medication
management.
TAU is the

Demographics: age,
gender, ethnicity,
marital status,
military
information,
employment,
income, previous
incarceration,
homeless status and
treatment needs
Process times: dates
when veterans were
referred and
admitted to HUDVASH, received the
Housing Choice
Voucher, and moved
into permanent
housing
Housing status 12
months after moving
into housing

81!
!

Time to placement
in permanent
supported housing,
rates of housing
retention, and
change in urgent
care and inpatient
mental health
services utilization
during the 12
months after
veterans were
placed in
permanent
supported housing.

Veterans
experiencing
homelessness who
have psychiatric
disabilities or
substance abuse use
problems can live
independently in
the community.
Findings support
the efficacy of
permanent
supported housing
in reducing rates of
homelessness and
associated health
care utilization,
particularly those
associated with
emergency care and
inpatient
hospitalizations.
It is feasible to
serve both
medically and
socially vulnerable
chronically
homeless veterans.

More rigorous research is
needed in regards to
housing first studies with
particular need for
randomized control
studies to further evaluate
the model with homeless
individuals who are
experiencing both
substance abuse and
mental health issues that
complicate the
engagement and retention
process.
Need for long term
evaluation (housing
stability).

!

Nyamathi,
Sands,
PattatucciAragon, Berg,
Leake, Hahn
& Morisky,
2004
Perceptions of
health status by
homeless US
veterans

The perception of
health status was
compared among
homeless veterans
and homeless
nonveterans
residing in the
skid row area of
Los Angeles

Data were collected
b/w 1997 and 2002
as part of a larger
study examining
the effectiveness of
a case managed
program by a nurse
vs a standard
program on the
compliance of
homeless adults
with latent TB that
were offered a 6
month course of
isoniazid by
directly observed
therapy

O’Toole,
Conde-Martel,
Gibbon,
Hanus & Fine,
2003
Health care of
homeless

To demographic
characteristics,
comorbid
conditions, and
sources of usual
care among
homeless male

Cross-sectional,
community based
survey of homeless
adults.
Using face-to-face
interviews over 5
month period.

!

standard VA
case
management
model for HUDVASH where
veteran remains
at current
placement
(shelter, etc).
331 homeless
veterans and
non-homeless
veterans in Los
Angeles area
79= selfreported as
veterans

531 homeless
adults in
Pittsburgh and
Philadelphia
425 male
127 male
veterans

Descriptive analysis
consisted of
frequencies and
percentiles.
Categorical
sociodemographic
and behavioral
characteristics
assessed with chisquare and Fischer
exact tests.
Differences in
continuous variables
assessed by
independent sample
t-tests.
Logistic regression
used to estimate the
independent effect
of veteran status on
health.

Sociodemographic
factors
Personal factors
Situational factors
Behavioral factors

Demographic
characteristics
Comorbidities,
health insurance,
source for usual care
Daily sustenance
and self-identified

Differences
between veterans
and non-veterans
with chi-squared or
Fischer’s exact
tests for categorical
data and t test for

82!
!

Veteran subsample
was older and
better educated.
Veterans
significantly less
likely to perceive
their health status
as fair/poor
compared to nonveteran homeless
men.
Only about 1/5th of
veterans reported
receiving veterans’
benefits while they
are more likely to
report having a
regular source of
care.
Non-veterans are
more likely to
report a perception
of fair/poor health
status.
Incarceration was
positively
associated with
fair/poor health
status.
Homeless male
veterans were
significantly older,
better educated and
less likely to have
been arrested in the
previous 12

Poor coverage of VA
health benefits may reflect
convoluted process of
establishing eligibility and
registering for VA health
benefits.
Recommendations for
health educators
implementing any
program to build upon
existing strengths of the
veteran while addressing
their substance use and
environmental factors
(work/housing).
Pressing need for medical,
psychiatric, social and
support services targeted
towards veterans with
easy access.
Better facilitation of
health care benefits for
veterans.

The study results suggest
that homeless male
veterans continue to have
greater medical and
mental health needs than
non-veteran homeless
men.

!
veterans: why
are some
individuals
falling through
the safety net?

veterans and nonveterans and to
specifically look
at characteristics
of homeless
veterans who
report needing
VA benefits.

Tessler,
Rosenheck &
Gamache,
2002
Comparison of
homeless
veterans with
other homeless
men in a large
clinical
outreach
program

(1)Whether
homeless male
veterans have
more personal
resources than
other homeless
men.
(2)Whether
homeless veterans
of the era of the
All-Volunteer
Force are
different from
homeless men
who served
during the era of
the military draft.

!

Structured
interviews of
eligible clients who
enrolled in
ACCESS program
(Access to
Community Care
and Effective
Services and
Supports)

Structured
interviews of
eligible clients
who enrolled in
ACCESS
program (Access
to Community
Care and
Effective
Services and
Supports)

needs

continuous data

Sociodemographic
factors, military
service, social
dysfunction, family
of origin instability

Comparisons
between veterans
and nonveterans in
the ACCESS
program and
comparisons
between veterans
from different eras
of military
recruitment policy
(conscription vs.
volunteer)

83!
!

months.
Homeless male
veterans were
significantly more
likely to report a
chronic medical
condition and 2 or
more mental health
conditions with
higher rates of
hepatitis/cirrhosis
and PTSD reported.
41.1% of veterans
reported accessing
the VA health
system in this
study.
Veterans tend to
have more personal
resources than other
homeless men.
Homeless veterans
are better educated,
less likely to have
never been married
and more likely to
be working for pay
than homeless
nonveterans.
More evidence of
alcohol dependence
and abuse among
homeless veterans
than homeless
nonveterans.
Those who served
in volunteer era are
disproportionately
black, never
married, homeless
for less than a year,
working for pay,
and score higher in
childhood conduct
disorder, family of

They are significantly less
likely to access
community health centers,
instead rely on shelter
based and street outreach
services for care.
Indicates the need for
services tailored towards
this population.
Special attention needs to
be given to engaging
homeless veterans not
currently accessing
services or receiving
benefits.
The current study will
help clinicians working
with homeless veterans to
build on existing strengths
which distinguish
homeless veterans, such
as their higher education
and marital history, and
also on their lower rate of
childhood conduct
disorder.
Additionally, clinicians
can better understand the
need to give special
attention to alcohol
problems in homeless
veteran men.

!

Tsai, Doran &
Rosenheck,
2013
When health
insurance is not
a factor:
national
comparison of
homeless and
non-homeless
US veterans
who use
veterans affairs
emergency
departments

To examine the
rate of
homelessness
among veterans
who used EDs at
VA facilities in
fiscal year 2010
and compared
homeless ED
users with nonhomeless Ed
users on
sociodemographic
characteristics,
medical and
psychiatric
diagnoses, use of
psychotropic
medications &
other clinical
characteristics

Cross sectional
study design to
compare, among
ED users, veterans
identified as
homeless with
those who were not
homeless on
sociodemographics,
medical &
psychiatric
diagnoses,
prescriptions for
psychotropic
medication,
mortality risk
indicators & other
clinical
characteristics

Identified
veterans who
used VA EDs in
2010.
Homeless
veteran ED
users=64,091
Non-homeless
veteran ED
users=866,621

Effect size
difference btw
homeless and other
ED users when
comparing
characteristics.
First set of analyses
addressed the
association btw
general
characteristics &
homelessness
among ED users.
Second analyses
addressed the
relationship of
specific diagnoses
coded during ED
visits to
homelessness.
Bivariate
comparisons and
stepwise logistic
regression

Sociodemographics
(service
connection),
medical and
psychiatric
diagnoses, use of
psychotropic
medications and
other clinical
characteristics

Tsai,
Kasprow, &
Rosenheck,
2013
Latent
homeless risk
profiles of a
national sample
of homeless
veterans and
their relation to
program

To identify risk
and need profiles
of homeless
veterans and
examine the
relationship
between profiles
and referrals and
admissions to VA
homeless service
programs

Examined data
from the VA’s new
Homeless
Operations
Management and
Evaluation System
(HOMES).
Used latent class
analysis based on 9
homeless risk
factors.

120,852
veterans from
142 sites
nationally

Assessment
interviews
conducted
Used latent class
analysis to identify
four classes of risk.
Different classes
then compared on
sociodemographic
characteristics,
clinical diagnosis
and homeless

Homeless history
Incarceration
history
Unemployment
history
Income
Medical history
Psychiatric history

!

84!
!

origin instability
and on all three of
the subscales of the
addiction severity
index.
Homeless ED users
were younger, had
lower incomes,
were more likely to
have liver disease,
HIV/AIDS but less
likely to have
dementia and had
slightly greater
indication of
mortality risk.
Homeless ED users
more likely to have
broad range of
psychiatric
disorders (strongest
effects from
substance abuse
and dual diagnosis).
Homeless ED users
more than twice the
odds of having a
diagnosis of drug
use disorder,
schizophrenia or
adjustment disorder
than non-homeless
ED users.
Four class model of
risk factors
identified:
-Relatively few
problems
-Dual diagnosis
-Poverty-substance
abuse-incarceration
-Disabling medical
problems
The relatively few
problems group

More attention to the
general social isolation of
homeless patients as well
as mental health care is
needed.
Advocates suggest more
comprehensive ED
discharge planning to
facilitate access of
homeless patients to
supported housing and
other psychiatric
rehabilitation programs.
EDs may be important
location for specialized
outreach for the homeless.
Given the great use of
EDs by homeless greater
attention to providing
specialized services
including social services
and psychiatric services
may reduce ED use.

The four identified latent
groups are important in
understanding how
homeless veterans differ
from each other and what
services might be
appropriate for each
group.
These groups were
referred to different
homeless programs with
different admission

!
referral and
admission
patterns

Tsai, Mares &
Rosenheck,
2012
Do homeless
veterans have
the same needs
and outcomes
as non-veterans

!

programs to which
they were referred.

Comparing
veterans and nonveterans in a
nationalsupported
housing initiative
for chronically
homeless adults
initiated jointly
by the US
Department of
Housing and
Urban
Development, the
Department of
Health and
Human Services
and VA.

Observational
study

162 chronically
homeless
veterans
388 nonveterans

Sociodemographic
data, war era
categorization,
mental health and
substance abuse
self-reported
diagnoses
Housing, clinical
status, health service
use, VA connection
and VA health
service use

85!
!

Outcomes over
time
War time era for
veterans

was significantly
younger, more
likely to be female,
more likely to be
married and had
more years of
education than
other groups.
The disabling
medical problems
group was the
oldest group, most
likely to have a
chronic medical
condition and most
likely to be
unemployed in the
past 3 years.
Vets in dual
diagnosis group had
highest rates of
substance use
disorders, psychotic
disorders and
psychiatric
hospitalizations.

patterns.
Need for diversity of
homeless VA services
because of the
heterogeneous risk and
needs of the homeless
veteran population.

Veterans tended to
be older, from the
Vietnam era age
group, were more
likely male and
more likely to have
completed high
school than nonveterans.
Veterans reported
greater use of
outpatient mental
health service than
non-veterans.
Both veterans and
non-veterans
gradually reduced
their use of health

Supportive housing
programs for homeless
veterans reduce their
clinical needs.
Only half of veterans in
the sample reported that
they use VA for medical
services and less than onefifth reported that the use
of VA psychiatric or
substance abuse services.
This suggests that
veterans often use
services provided by
community providers and
encourages VA to
coordinate its efforts with
community providers in

!
services over time
after they obtained
housing, especially
inpatient services.

!

86!
!

serving the homeless
veterans.
More research is needed
on how often homeless
veterans use non-VA
services only or both VA
and non-VA services.

!
Homelessness, Veterans & Chronic Disease
Citation

Research
Question

Method

Sample
Size/

Goldstein,
Luther, Haas,
Appelt &
Gordon, 2010
Factor structure
and risk factors
for the health
status of
homeless
veterans

Aims of
identifying the
factor structure of
health status of
homeless veterans
that underlies the
clusters identified
and evaluating
demographic and
historical data
that could be
associated with
each of the
factors obtained.

Using data from a
previous study to
determine
comorbid
conditions among
homeless veterans;
the present study
examined the
structure of
subgroup patterns
through the use of
factor analysis.
Interview based
questionnaire
administered to
veteran who were
presently or
recently homeless.

3,595 interviews
conducted over
two year period
in VISN 4 (PA,
OH, WV, NJ).

Measurements

Variables of
Interest

Significant
Findings

Recommendations

Factor analysis
computed using
diagnostic ratings
made by
interviewers as to
the presence or
absence of the
psychiatric and
general medical
disorders.

Psychiatric
disorders:
schizophrenia,
mood disorder,
personality
disorder, combat
PTSD, adjustment
disorder,
alcohol/drug
abuse/dependence,
AOD
Medical disorders:
eye,
cardiovascular,
HTN, COPD,
gastrointestinal,
liver, seizure,
orthopedic, skin,
trauma

Factors represent
configurations rather
than single
disorders.
Cardiopulmonary
disease w/o
significant
psychiatric disorder,
mood disorders
associated with
orthopedic, eye and
GI health problems,
stress related
disorders, substance
use disorders and
psychosis.
Homeless veterans
have complex and
heterogeneous
pattern of health
problems that do not
fit any single rubric.
Married participants
were less likely to
have a high end
score on the
addiction factor than
unmarried
participants.
Odds ratio for use of
DVA healthcare
facilities by
individuals high on
stress factor was
quite low,
suggesting that
homeless veterans

Study examined the
structure of four
previously defined
subgroups (addiction,
psychosis, vascular
disorders & generalized
medical and psychiatric
illness) through factor
analysis which yielded a
five factor solution:
cardiac, mood, stress,
addiction and psychosis
factors.
Better understanding of
patterns of homeless
veterans health can be
useful with regard to
treatment and
management planning.

Population

!

87!
!

!

Goldstein,
Luther,
Jacoby, Haas
& Gordon,
2008
A taxonomy of
medical
comorbidity for
veterans who
are homeless

(1) to identify
types and patters
of medical illness
found in homeless
veterans
(2) to determine if
a finite number of
profiles could be
identified using
present or
absence ratings of
the disorders and
if those profiles
could be related
to demographic
characteristics,
living situation,
length of
homelessness and
referral areas
recommended by
interviewers.

Secondary data
analysis from a VA
designed and
administered
interview-based
questionnaire for
veterans who were
presently or
recently homeless.
Used in many in
others studies.

Data made
available from
3,595 interviews
conducted over
2 year period in
one VISN.
Homeless
veterans from
both urban and
rural areas
living in
shelters, on the
streets or with
family or
friends.
Participants had
to have at least
one medical
disorder to be
included which
included 2,978
cases.

Cluster analysis
used to classify the
presence of absence
of 12 disorders.
Areas for evaluating
intergroup
differences include:
demographic
factors, living
situation describing
the homeless
condition, substance
use history,
employment status
and referral
recommendations
made by the
interviewers.

The focus of the
study included
medical history
section and
relevant
demographic and
historical data.

Tsai,
Kasprow, &
Rosenheck,

To identify risk
and need profiles
of homeless

Examined data
from the VA’s new
Homeless

120,852
veterans from
142 sites

Assessment
interviews
conducted

Homeless history
Incarceration
history

!

88!
!

with PTSD or
history of trauma
seem reluctant to
utilize DVA
resources.
Four resulting
clusters best fit the
data: cluster 1oral/dental and
orthopedic
disorders; cluster 2eye problems,
hypertension,
cardiovascular and
GI disorders; cluster
3-hepatic and GI
disorders; cluster 4hypertension with
secondary elevations
of cardiovascular
and pulmonary
disorders.
Cluster 1
=dental/orthopedic
problems
Cluster 2
=generalized illness
Cluster 3
=hepatic disorders
Cluster 4
=cardiopulmonary
disease
Over 75% of the
cases in each cluster
were rated as having
at least one
psychiatric disorder.
Found 18% of the
participants were
receiving VA
disability benefits.
Four class model of
risk factors
identified:

The characteristics of
cluster profiling suggest
the presence of
significant comorbidity in
the homeless veteran
population.
The majority of homeless
veterans with health
problems have multiple
medical issues that are
often associated with
substance use disorders.
Recommendations for
basic support of this
vulnerable group,
psychiatric care and
medical care.
Knowledge about
common comorbidity
associations and
taxonomic systems may
be helpful in designing
health evaluation
programs better fit to this
population.

The four identified latent
groups are important in
understanding how

!
2013
Latent
homeless risk
profiles of a
national sample
of homeless
veterans and
their relation to
program
referral and
admission
patterns

!

veterans and
examine the
relationship
between profiles
and referrals and
admissions to VA
homeless service
programs

Operations
Management and
Evaluation System
(HOMES).
Used latent class
analysis based on 9
homeless risk
factors.

nationally

Used latent class
analysis to identify
four classes of risk.
Different classes
then compared on
sociodemographic
characteristics,
clinical diagnosis
and homeless
programs to which
they were referred.

89!
!

Unemployment
history
Income
Medical history
Psychiatric history

-Relatively few
problems
-Dual diagnosis
-Poverty-substance
abuse-incarceration
-Disabling medical
problems
The relatively few
problems group was
significantly
younger, more likely
to be female, more
likely to be married
and had more years
of education than
other groups.
The disabling
medical problems
group was the oldest
group, most likely to
have a chronic
medical condition
and most likely to be
unemployed in the
past 3 years.
Vets in dual
diagnosis group had
highest rates of
substance use
disorders, psychotic
disorders and
psychiatric
hospitalizations.

homeless veterans differ
from each other and what
services might be
appropriate for each
group.
These groups were
referred to different
homeless programs with
different admission
patterns.
Need for diversity of
homeless VA services
because of the
heterogeneous risk and
needs of the homeless
veteran population.

!
Homelessness, Veterans & Emergency Department Use
Citation

Research
Question

Method

Sample
Size/
Population

Measurements

Variables of
Interest

Significant
Findings

Recommendations

Chambers,
Chiu, Katic,
Kiss,
Redelemeier,
Levinson &
Hwang, 2013
High utilizers
of emergency
health services
in a
populationbased cohort
of homeless
adults

To identify
predictors of
frequent ED use
among population
based sample of
homeless adults in
Toronto, Ontario

Assessed ED visit
rates using
administrative data
from the Institute
for Clinical
Evaluative
Sciences

1189 homeless
adults recruited
from shelters
and meal
programs in
Toronto over
12 consecutive
months in
2004/05

Logistic regression
to identify
predictors of ED use
Compare homeless
participants with
any ED use with
those w/o any ED
use and homeless
participants
considered to be
frequent ED users
with those not
considered to be
frequent users.

Characteristics of
homeless ED users
Demographics

Predisposing
factors
significantly
associated w/ any
ED use were being
homeless 2 years
or more.
Frequent ED users
represented only
10% of sample but
contributed to
more than 60% of
total ED visits
during study.

Chwastiak,
Tsai &
Rosenheck,
2012
Impact of
health
insurance
status and a
diagnosis of
serious mental
illness on
whether
chronically
homeless
individuals
engage in
primary care

To evaluate the
impact of a
diagnosis of
serious mental
illness on use of a
primary care
provider (vs ED)
as a source of care
by people who
were chronically
homeless

Cross-sectional
secondary analysis
of data from the
Collaborative
Initiative to Help
End Chronic
Homelessness
(CICH).

750 chronically
homeless adults
enrolled in the
11-site CICH
program

Face to face
interviews, selfreport measures.
Usual source of
medical care.
Sociodemographic
characteristics.
Clinical measures
(diagnosed medical
conditions).
Substance abuse.
Severity of
psychiatric
symptoms.
Health status.
Health insurance.
Community

Usual source of care:
ED, clinic in hospital,
clinic in community,
doctor’s office,
Mobile health clinic,
other..

Lack of health
insurance in the
previous year was
strongest indicator
of using the ED as
regular source of
medical care.
Sample from
CICH showed
high rates of
chronic medical
conditions along
with co-occurring
psychiatric and
substance use
disorders.
Major barrier to

Subgroups of homeless
individuals were
extremely high utilizers
of ED and had multiple,
complex health care
needs.
Interventions such as
intensive case
management or housing
first models have
potential to reduce ED
visits, lower costs and
improve social and
clinical outcomes.
Need improvement in
coordination of care
across health and social
services to reduce
homeless ED use.
Findings suggest
previously uninsured
individuals had fewer ED
visits and inpatient
admissions and more
primary care visits. This
supports health policy
implications (Affordable
Care Act) to expand the
scope of Medicaid to
increase the number of
individuals covered by
states.
More aggressive attempts
needed to increase access
to Medicaid in order to
reduce unnecessary use of

!

90!
!

!
adjustment.

DiPietro,
Kindermann
& Schenkel,
2012
Ill, illiterant
and insured:
the top 20
users of
emergency
departments in
Baltimore city

To document the
clinical and
demographic
characteristics of
the 20 most
frequent users of
emergency
departments in
one urban area
(Baltimore City).
To provide a
perspective of the
experience of
homelessness
among Baltimore
City’s most
frequent ED users.

Retrospective study
based on a review
of administrative
records from 3 EDs
located within 2
miles of each other
and the databases
maintained by two
agencies providing
services to
homeless people in
the same urban
area.

20 of the most
frequent users
identified in the
combined
dataset.
Patients
considered
homeless if
they had come
to at least one
of the service
agencies during
the study year.

Frequency of use,
insurance status, top
ICD-9 codes.

Demographic, clinical
and housing status
characteristics of top
20 users.

Doran, Raven
& Rosenheck,
2013
What drives
frequent
emergency
department
use in an
integrated
health system?
National data
from the

To determine what
multidimensional
patient-level
factors are the
most strongly
associated with a
6-level gradient of
VHA ED use.

Cross sectional
analysis of data
obtained from
national VHA
databases for fiscal
year 2010

All veterans
who used VHA
services in
fiscal year
2010.
5,531,379
patients who
received
services in
2010.

Examine bivariate
relationships
between ED use and
patient
characteristics,
using simple means,
frequencies, and
proportions.
Multinominal
logistic regression to
identify independent
relationships with

The number of ED
visits to any VHA
facility during fiscal
year 2010.
Predisposing,
enabling and need
categories.

!

91!
!

engaging in
primary care is
lack of health
insurance.

expensive services such
as EDs and achieve cost
savings.

Most common
characteristic
among to 20 users
was homelessness.
Other frequent
characteristics was
being relatively
young and having
poor health.
The top 20 users
accounted for 1%
of the total visits
for these three
EDs during study
period.
Most common
conditions among
users were: pain,
nausea/vomiting,
altered
consciousness, and
respiratory
complaints.
Visits related to
chronic disease
conditions (HIV,
HTN, DM,
drug/etoh abuse).
Strongest
sociodemographic
correlate of ED
use was
homelessness,
with homeless
veterans 6.6 times
more likely to be
among the most
frequent ED users.
Heart failure,
headaches,

Sharing of electronic
medical health record btw
facilities might allow
better coordination of
care.
Combination of acute and
chronic complaints
among population
indicates importance of
arranging appropriate
follow-up care to cover
complex needs and social
challenges to improve
overall health.

4 factors most strongly
associated with ED use
across multiple usefrequency levels include:
schizophrenia,
homelessness, opioid
prescription use and heart
failure.
Address social needs in
addition to medical
problems in order to meet
ED user needs (housing

!
veterans health
administration

Doran, Vashi,
Platis, Curry,
Rowe, Gang
& Vaca, 2013
Navigating the
boundaries of
emergency
department
care:
addressing the
medical and
social needs of
patients who
are homeless

Hastings,
Smith,
Weinberger,
Schmader,
Olsen &
Oddone, 2011
Emergency

!

ED use.

To understand
interpersonal and
systems-level
factors relevant to
delivering health
care to emergency
department
patients who are
homeless.
Sought to gain
meaningful insight
into the
multifaceted
processes of
delivering health
care to patients
who are homeless
in the ED to guide
improvements in
current practice
and generate
hypotheses that
can be further
explored for future
research.
To describe
national VAMC
ED disposition
rates; to
characterize the
population of
veterans with

Qualitative
grounded theory
study
Semi-structured
interviews with
emergency
medicine residents
from 2 residency
programs

Emergency
medicine
residents as key
informants
from 2
residency
programs
23 interviews in
total
12 male
11 female

Interviews
conducted by one
researcher.
Coding completed
by a core team of 3
researchers.

N/A

Retrospective
cohort study using
a national sample
of veterans who
had a VAMC ED
visit over a 9
month observation

649,537
eligible patients
from sample of
patients that
had 1 or more
visits to VAMC
ED during 9

Descriptive statistics
to characterize
patient sample.
Generalized
estimating equations
to examine
influence of patient

Dependent variable=
ED visits and hospital
admissions within 30
days of index ED visit
Independent
variables=
predisposing

92!
!

anxiety, bipolar
disorder,
personality
disorder and
schizophrenia
were strong
correlates of ED
use.
Drug and alcohol
abuse were
independently
associated with
increased ED use.
Three unifying
themes found: (1)
the use of pattern
recognition in
identifying and
treating patients
who are homeless
(2) variations from
standard ED care
for patients who
are homeless and
(3) tensions in
navigating the
boundaries of ED
social care.
Participants felt
particularly
ineffectual with
patients who were
both alcoholic and
chronically
homeless.

subsidies and income
supplements).
Strongest correlates of
frequent ED use represent
common thread of serve
psychosocial and medical
vulnerability.

Homeless persons
account for only
0.5% of
nonfederal ED
visits, but the
frequency of
homelessness was

Need for better screening
mechanisms to identify
veterans at risk for
recidivism and improved
methods of ensuring
prompt follow-up care for
those who need it.

Need for more uniform
homelessness screening
and documentation
procedures in ED.
Residents have a lower
threshold for admitting
patients who are
homeless to the hospital.
Need for future
exploration regarding the
difficulties in identifying
patients who are
homeless in the ED, how
homelessness affects ED
care, and tensions
surrounding social care
provision in the ED.
More research is needed
to better understand
social care in ED and
who to best provide it.

!
department
visits in
veterans
affairs medical
facilities

treat-and-release
ED visits; to
determine the
frequency of
repeat ED visits,
hospitalizations, &
deaths
experienced by
veterans after
being treated and
released from a
VAMC ED and to
identify factors
that predict repeat
ED visits and
hospitalizations
within 30 days of
the original treatand-release ED
visit.

period.

month period.
Final sample
included
128,174
individuals.
102,516 treated
and released
25,630
admitted to
hospital
28 died in ED

and ED visit factors
outcomes.

characteristics (age,
sex, race), enabling
resources (income,
homeless, insured),
need variables
(comorbidity, service
connection, treat-andrelease, hospital
admissions)

Ku, Scott,
Kertesz &
Pitts, 2010
Factors
associated
with use of
urban
emergency
departments
by the US
homeless
population

Study sought to
characterize
homeless people
who visited urban
EDs across the US
Assess whether
homelessness
itself or
characteristics
commonly
associated with
homelessness
independently
predicted ED use

Descriptive, crosssectional secondary
analysis of the ED
components of the
2005/2006 National
Hospital
Ambulatory Care
Surveys
(NHAMCS-ED)

National
sample from
survey users
excluding longstay military,
federal and VA
hospitals.
91% EDs 2005
87% EDs 2006

Bivariate and
multivariable
associations

Homelessness=
dependent variable
Demographic
characteristics/clinical
characteristics=
independent variables

!

93!
!

10 times higher in
this sample of
veterans treated
and released from
VAMC EDs.
Homelessness
predictor of repeat
ED visits and
hospital
admissions.
Homeless vets
face challenges
with obtaining
medications,
arranging care
with outpatient
providers and
securing
transportation for
follow-up
appointments.
Severity of
underlying illness
and lack of social
support also
contribute to
higher rates of ED
return.
Homeless people
arrive by
ambulance more
often, older, more
often uninsured,
more often treated
for acute injury,
alcohol, drug
abuse or
psychiatric injury.
Increased
tendency toward
ED use shortly
after recent
hospital care by
homeless.
Homeless

Timely follow-up care
following hospitalization
has been suggested as a
potential measure of
quality in healthcare
organization.

More comprehensive
discharge planning and
specialized ED based
programs.
Consider medically
supervised recovery
environments to reduce
overload for hospitals and
EDs.
Housing first approaches
to reduce costs and
improve health outcomes.
High incidence of repeat
ED visits and frequent
hospital use identifies a
pressing need for policy
remedies.

!

Kushel,
Perry,
Bangsberg,
Clark and
Moss, 2002
Emergency
department
use among the
homeless and
marginally
housed: results
from a
community
based study

To examine
factors associated
with emergency
department use
among homeless
and marginally
housed persons

Community based
survey, 45 minute
interviews using
standard
questionnaire

2578 English
speaking
homeless and
marginally
housed adults
in San
Francisco area

Predisposing
factors: age, sex,
ethnicity, education,
housing status,
criminal hx,
victimization,
substance use,
mental illness.
Enabling factors:
income, medical
insurance, receipt of
public benefits.
Need factors: selfreported health
status, chronic
illness and HIV
status.

Frequency and
volume of emergency
department
encounters.
Use of ambulatory
care services.
Inpatient
hospitalizations

Tsai, Doran
& Rosenheck,
2013
When health
insurance is
not a factor:
national
comparison of
homeless and
non-homeless
US veterans
who use
veterans
affairs
emergency
departments

To examine the
rate of
homelessness
among veterans
who used EDs at
VA facilities in
fiscal year 2010
and compared
homeless ED
users with nonhomeless Ed users
on
sociodemographic
characteristics,
medical and
psychiatric
diagnoses, use of
psychotropic
medications &
other clinical
characteristics

Cross sectional
study design to
compare, among
ED users, veterans
identified as
homeless with
those who were not
homeless on
sociodemographics,
medical &
psychiatric
diagnoses,
prescriptions for
psychotropic
medication,
mortality risk
indicators & other
clinical
characteristics

Identified
veterans who
used VA EDs
in 2010.
Homeless
veteran ED
users=64,091
Non-homeless
veteran ED
users=866,621

Effect size
difference btw
homeless and other
ED users when
comparing
characteristics.
First set of analyses
addressed the
association btw
general
characteristics &
homelessness
among ED users.
Second analyses
addressed the
relationship of
specific diagnoses
coded during ED
visits to
homelessness.
Bivariate

Sociodemographics
(service connection),
medical and
psychiatric diagnoses,
use of psychotropic
medications and other
clinical characteristics

!

94!
!

individuals are
more likely to see
residents and
interns.
40% of sample
used ED in
previous year,
which is 3 times
the US norm.
Repeated ED users
accounted for the
majority of total
ED use.
Effects of lack of
housing (chronic
illness, violence)
may increase ED
use.
Almost half of
respondents used
ED as their only
source of health
care.
Homeless ED
users were
younger, had
lower incomes,
were more likely
to have liver
disease,
HIV/AIDS but less
likely to have
dementia and had
slightly greater
indication of
mortality risk.
Homeless ED
users more likely
to have broad
range of
psychiatric
disorders
(strongest effects
from substance

Need to reduce ED
overcrowding by focusing
on the homeless and
marginally housed who
have repeated ED use.
Homeless people use EDs
according to medical
need and more attention
should be paid to
providing more services
to reduce the need and
repeated visits to the ED.
Health policy to provide
housing to individuals
may help reduce the
homeless and marginally
housed reliance on the
ED system.
More attention to the
general social isolation of
homeless patients as well
as mental health care is
needed.
Advocates suggest more
comprehensive ED
discharge planning to
facilitate access of
homeless patients to
supported housing and
other psychiatric
rehabilitation programs.
EDs may be important
location for specialized
outreach for the
homeless.
Given the great use of
EDs by homeless greater
attention to providing
specialized services

!
comparisons and
stepwise logistic
regression

Tsai &
Rosenheck,
2013
Risk factors
for ED use
among
homeless
veterans

!

To examine the
proportion of
homeless VA
service users who
use VA ED
services at
moderate and high
levels over a one
year period in
comparison with
domiciled VA
service users and
then identify
sociodemographic,
clinical, service
use and
psychotropic
medication
variables
associated with
ED use among
homeless VA
service users.

Analysis of data
through VA
electronic patient
record system.
Cross-sectional
case-control design
compared homeless
non-ED users to
moderate and
frequent ED users
on
sociodemographic
characteristics,
medical and
psychiatric
diagnoses,
psychotropic
medication
prescriptions and
mortality risk
indicators.

5,388,684
domiciled VA
service users.
142,695
homeless VA
service users.
Homeless
classification
and ED use per
electronic
record.

Compared three
groups: non-ED
users, moderate ED
users (1-4 visits) and
frequent ED users
(more than 4 ED
visits).

95!
!

Sociodemographics,
medical, psychiatric
status, and
psychotropic
medication use of
homeless VA patients
separated by ED use
frequency

abuse and dual
diagnosis).
Homeless ED
users more than
twice the odds of
having a diagnosis
of drug use
disorder,
schizophrenia or
adjustment
disorder than nonhomeless ED
users.
Homeless VA
service users more
than 7 times likely
to visit ED
frequently than
domiciled VA
service users.
Overall, homeless
VA service users
were 3 times as
likely to use ED
than domiciled VA
service users.
Biggest difference
between homeless
ED and non-ED
users were in
diagnoses of
dementia, liver
disease and
congestive heart
failure (all chronic
disorders)

including social services
and psychiatric services
may reduce ED use.

National VA data
indicates that 45% of
homeless VA service
users used the VA ED
services at least once
during the study year
(2010).
Despite a lack of
insurance barriers playing
a role in medical and
psychiatric care.
Indicates that other
factors such as social play
a role in increasing risk
for ED use among this
population.
Homeless ED users had
higher rates of psychiatric
diagnoses than homeless
non-ED users.
High levels of medical
and mental health service
use among homeless ED
users suggests that they
are seeking help for
psychosocial needs as
well.

!
Homelessness, Veterans & Barriers to Health Care
Citation

Research
Question

Method

Sample
Size/
Population

Measurements

Variables of
Interest

Significant
Findings

Recommendations

Applewhite,
1997
Homeless
veterans:
perspectives on
social services
use

To explore the
perceptions of
homeless
veterans about
the nature and
scope of
homelessness, as
well as the
obstacles
encountered in
obtaining
services.
Following
questions
explored:
What social
problems do
homeless
veterans
experience? What
obstacles do
veterans
encounter in
obtaining health
and human
services?

Qualitative
study: use of
focus groups to
collect data.
Semi-structured
interview guide
used.

Convenience
sample of 60
male veterans
(5 focus
groups).
Population was
diverse
selection of
veterans from
different wars
and military
experience,
different racial
groups, chronic
and recently
homeless, those
familiar and
unfamiliar with
social services
and veterans
from all age
groups.

Content analysis
used to analyze data
(coding and sorting
of data into
categories, themes
and patterns).

Problems
confronting
homeless
veterans: health
and mental health,
resource related
and public
perception.
Barriers to service
use: insensitive
service providers,
negative policies,
and ineffective
service delivery
system.

Health and mental
health problems
focused around chronic
health problems,
substance abuse,
psychosocial and
clinically diagnosed
problems and selfesteem problems.
Substance abuse
viewed as major
obstacle in overcoming
homelessness.
Most psychosocial and
psychiatric problems
came from veterans
who experienced
combat duty while
serving in Vietnam.
Their lack of selfesteem seen as a barrier
that often destroyed
their will and
determination to escape
homelessness.
Housing options and
job availability
considered major
resource problem.
Stigma associated with
homelessness often
results in homeless
people being
victimized and blamed
by the general public
for their circumstances
in life.
See service delivery

Need to improve service
delivery to make more
accessible to veterans and
more user friendly.
Especially addressing
problems related to being
in the military (PTSD,
readjustment, war service
recognition).
Need for community
based resources in order
for veterans to reintegrate
into society as productive,
contributing individuals
and families.
Help veteran’s secure
affordable permanent
housing for themselves
and their families.
Need for creative
planning and policies
across different levels.r

!

96!
!

!

Baggett,
O’Connell,
Singer &
Rigotti, 2010
The unmet health
care needs of
homeless adults:
a national study

To assess the
prevalence and
predictors of
past-year unmet
needs for 5 types
of health care
services in a
national sample
of homeless
adults.

Secondary
analysis of the
2003 Health
Care for the
Homeless
(HCH) User
Survey.
Nationally
representative
survey of
individuals
using clinical
services
provided by the
federally funded
HCH program.

3 stage
sampling
design.
30 HCH
grantees (79
clinic sites)
33 interviews
per grantee site
966 respondents
age 18 or older

Chi square to
determine
unadjusted
relationships b/w
predictor and
outcome variables.
Multivariable
logistic regression to
determine factors
independently
associated with each
outcome measure of
unmet need among
all adults.

Predisposing
factors, enabling
factors and need
factors (per
behavioral model
for vulnerable
populations)

Blue-Howells,
McGuire &
Nakashima,
2008
Co-location of
health care

Case study to
examine how the
Veterans Affairs
Greater Los
Angeles
Healthcare

Case study
Qualitative
New program
offered same
day co-located
mental health,

One innovative
program at
GLA

N/A

Patient-related
barriers (lack of
health insurance)
to care and
institution-related
barriers (service

!

97!
!

system as insensitive
and confusing tangle of
policies, programs and
procedures.
The service delivery
system lacks
comprehensiveness and
fairness according to
veterans (bureaucratic
obstacles).
73% of respondents
reported at least one
unmet health need:
inability to obtain
needed medical or
surgical care,
prescription
medications, mental
health care, eyeglasses,
and dental care.
Significant predictors
of unmet needs include
food insufficiency, outof-home placement as
a minor, vision
impairment and lack of
health insurance.
Past year employment
is associated with
unmet needs for
medical or surgical
care and prescription
medications. Confirms
that when employment
is sole source of
income in poverty
setting patients often
prioritize work over
health.
Creating an access
center for homeless
veterans that conducted
screening, assessment
and referral to all
services on a one-stop

Substantial barriers for
homeless adults exist in
accessing multiple
dimensions of health care.
Health services
compatible with work
schedules and delivered
in a flexible format will
be required to best serve
homeless people who rely
on employment as a
source of income.
Incorporating vision
services for the homeless
into health care model
may alleviate the burden
of vision impairment and
enhance functionality and
improve access to other
dimensions of care for the
homeless.

Institutional barriers
leading to service
fragmentation for
homeless veterans due to
geographical barriers and
waiting times can be

!
services for
homeless
veterans: a case
study of
innovation in
program
implementation

Chwastiak, Tsai
& Rosenheck,
2012
Impact of health
insurance status
and a diagnosis
of serious mental
illness on
whether
chronically
homeless
individuals
engage in
primary care

Kertesz, Holt,
Steward, Jones,
Roth,
Stringfellow,
Gordon, Kim,
Austin, Henry,
Johnson,
Granstaff,
O’Connell,
Golden, Young,
Davis & Pollio,
2013

!

System (GLA)
improved
homeless veteran
service utilization
through program
innovation that
addressed service
fragmentation
and to examine
the
implementation
process of the
new program.
To evaluate the
impact of a
diagnosis of
serious mental
illness on use of
a primary care
provider (vs ED)
as a source of
care by people
who were
chronically
homeless

Compared
homeless
patients’
experiences of
care in health
care
organizations that
differed in their
degree of primary
care design
service tailoring

medical and
homeless
services with a
coordinated
intake system.

fragmentation) to
care.

basis to promote
continuity and rapidity
of care.

improved with colocation of services and
one intake system offered
on same day basis.
The blending of
traditional primary care
and homeless care can
lead to quicker services
for veterans and improve
access to medical care,
mental health treatment
and social services.
Findings suggest
previously uninsured
individuals had fewer ED
visits and inpatient
admissions and more
primary care visits. This
supports health policy
implications (Affordable
Care Act) to expand the
scope of Medicaid to
increase the number of
individuals covered by
states.
More aggressive attempts
needed to increase access
to Medicaid in order to
reduce unnecessary use of
expensive services such
as EDs and achieve cost
savings.
Tailored primary care
service delivery is
associated with superior
service experience for
patients who experience
homelessness.
More research to better
understand which aspects
of service tailoring matter
most and whether they
can be translated across
service environments for

Cross-sectional
secondary
analysis of data
from the
Collaborative
Initiative to Help
End Chronic
Homelessness
(CICH).

750 chronically
homeless adults
enrolled in the
11-site CICH
program

Face to face
interviews, selfreport measures.
Usual source of
medical care.
Sociodemographic
characteristics.
Clinical measures
(diagnosed medical
conditions).
Substance abuse.
Severity of
psychiatric
symptoms.
Health status.
Health insurance.
Community
adjustment.

Usual source of
care: ED, clinic in
hospital, clinic in
community,
doctor’s office,
Mobile health
clinic, other..

Lack of health
insurance in the
previous year was
strongest indicator of
using the ED as regular
source of medical care.
Sample from CICH
showed high rates of
chronic medical
conditions along with
co-occurring
psychiatric and
substance use
disorders.
Major barrier to
engaging in primary
care is lack of health
insurance.

Survey based
comparison of
patient
experiences of
primary care at 5
federally funded
sites that
differed in the
degree to which
primary care
service delivery
was tailored for

Random sample
of homelessexperienced
English
speaking
persons who
received
primary care
from each site
of care.
6371 persons
met criteria

Use of Primary Care
Quality-Homeless
(PCQ-H) Survey
previously
developed.
3 phases of analysis
using chi square,
ANOVA and
regression

Patient-clinician
relationship
Cooperation
among clinicians
Accessibility or
coordination
Homeless-specific
needs

Patient-clinician
relationship and
perceptions of
cooperation among
providers were highest
where homelesstailoring was most
pronounced.
Higher levels of
tailoring associated
with a better
experience.

98!
!

!
Comparing
homeless
persons’ care
experiences in
tailored versus
non-tailored
primary care
programs
Kushel,
Vittinghoff &
Haas, 2001
Factors
associated with
the health care
utilization of
homeless persons

Nyamathi,
Sands,
PattatucciAragon, Berg,
Leake, Hahn &
Morisky,
2004
Perceptions of
health status by
homeless US
veterans

!

the homeless.
40-60 minute
survey
conducted faceto-face

2584 recruited
870
successfully
contacted and
screened
601 included in
analysis

To describe
factors associated
with use of and
perceived barriers
to receipt of
health care
among homeless
persons.

Descriptive.
Secondary data
analysis of the
National Survey
of Homeless
Assistance
Providers and
Clients.

2874 currently
homeless
persons
interviewed
through
homeless
assistance
programs
throughout the
US in Oct-Nov
1996

Bivariate
relationships b/w
independent
variables and 5
outcome variables.
Multivariate logistic
models based on
significant bivariate
relationships and a
priori data

Self-reported
ambulatory care
services,
emergency
departments and
inpatient hospital
services.
Inability to
receive necessary
care.
Inability to
comply with
prescription
medication in the
prior year

The perception of
health status was
compared among
homeless
veterans and
homeless
nonveterans
residing in the
skid row area of
Los Angeles

Data were
collected b/w
1997 and 2002
as part of a
larger study
examining the
effectiveness of
a case managed
program by a
nurse vs a
standard
program on the
compliance of
homeless adults
with latent TB
that were offered

331 homeless
veterans and
non-homeless
veterans in Los
Angeles area
79= selfreported as
veterans

Descriptive analysis
consisted of
frequencies and
percentiles.
Categorical
sociodemographic
and behavioral
characteristics
assessed with chisquare and Fischer
exact tests.
Differences in
continuous variables
assessed by
independent sample
t-tests.

Sociodemographic
factors
Personal factors
Situational factors
Behavioral factors

99!
!

An unfavorable
experience was 1.5 to 2
times more common at
the mainstream VA
sites compared with the
tailored non-VA site.

both homeless and nonhomeless populations.

Homeless persons
reported high rates of
acute hospital based
care, low rates of
ambulatory care and
difficulty accessing
health care.
Association b/w
insurance status and
increased use of
ambulatory care and
decreased barriers to
care (medical insurance
enables the use of
ambulatory care and
decreases barriers to
care).
Homeless persons are
more likely to use EDs
than the population as a
whole.
Veteran subsample was
older and better
educated.
Veterans significantly
less likely to perceive
their health status as
fair/poor compared to
non-veteran homeless
men.
Only about 1/5th of
veterans reported
receiving veterans’
benefits while they are
more likely to report
having a regular source
of care.

Having insurance is
consistently associated
with improved access to
care.
By improving provision
of medical insurance
among the homeless it
could significantly
decease high rates of ED
use and inpatient
hospitalizations and
improve morbidity among
the homeless.

Poor coverage of VA
health benefits may
reflect convoluted process
of establishing eligibility
and registering for VA
health benefits.
Recommendations for
health educators
implementing any
program to build upon
existing strengths of the
veteran while addressing
their substance use and
environmental factors
(work/housing).
Pressing need for

!
a 6 month
course of
isoniazid by
directly
observed
therapy
Wen, Hudak &
Hwang, 2007
Homeless
people’s
perceptions of
welcomeness
and
unwelcomeness
in healthcare
encounters

!

To examine how
homeless persons
experienced
“welcomeness”
and
“unwelcomeness”
in past encounters
with health care
providers and to
characterize their
perceptions of
these interactions.

Qualitative
content analysis
of 17 in-depth
interviews.

Logistic regression
used to estimate the
independent effect
of veteran status on
health.

Convenience
sample
17 homeless
men and
women
Aged 29-62
Residing in 5
shelters in
Toronto,
Canada

N/A

“I-it” encounters
- felt reduced to
an object
“I-you”
encounters
- valued as a
person

100!
!

Non-veterans are more
likely to report a
perception of fair/poor
health status.
Incarceration was
positively associated
with fair/poor health
status.
Respondents stated that
unwelcome
experiences elicited
strong emotional
responses that
decreased the
likelihood they would
see health care in the
future.
Respondents linked
unwelcoming
experiences with
discrimination and a
stigma against them
resulting in stereotypes
and not openness.

medical, psychiatric,
social and support
services targeted towards
veterans with easy access.
Better facilitation of
health care benefits for
veterans.
Create a welcoming
environment for the
vulnerable population in
order to provide more
effective care.
Many unwelcoming
experiences involved
non-clinical staff
suggesting that all health
care workers
(receptionists) be
included in future
research studies and in
educating staff about this
population.
Future studies looking at
perceptions from both
homeless patients and
health care providers may
provide more
comprehensive view of
how welcome the
homeless are and their
own behavior towards
health care staff.

!
Homelessness, Veterans & Recommendations for Improving Care
Citation

Research
Question

Method

Sample
Size/
Population

Measurements

Variables
of
Interest

Significant
Findings

Recommendations

Blue-Howells,
McGuire &
Nakashima, 2008
Co-location of
health care services
for homeless
veterans: a case
study of innovation
in program
implementation

Case study to
examine how the
Veterans Affairs
Greater Los
Angeles Healthcare
System (GLA)
improved homeless
veteran service
utilization through
program innovation
that addressed
service
fragmentation and
to examine the
implementation
process of the new
program.

Case study
Qualitative
New program
offered same
day co-located
mental health,
medical and
homeless
services with a
coordinated
intake system.

One innovative
program at GLA

N/A

Patientrelated
barriers (lack
of health
insurance) to
care and
institutionrelated
barriers
(service
fragmentation
) to care.

Creating an access
center for homeless
veterans that
conducted screening,
assessment and
referral to all services
on a one-stop basis to
promote continuity
and rapidity of care.

Kertesz, Holt,
Steward, Jones,
Roth,
Stringfellow,
Gordon, Kim,
Austin, Henry,
Johnson,
Granstaff,
O’Connell,
Golden, Young,
Davis & Pollio,
2013
Comparing
homeless persons’
care experiences in
tailored versus
non-tailored
primary care
programs

Compared
homeless patients’
experiences of care
in health care
organizations that
differed in their
degree of primary
care design service
tailoring

Survey based
comparison of
patient
experiences of
primary care at
5 federally
funded sites that
differed in the
degree to which
primary care
service delivery
was tailored for
the homeless.
40-60 minute
survey
conducted faceto-face

Random sample
of homelessexperienced
English
speaking
persons who
received
primary care
from each site of
care.
6371 persons
met criteria
2584 recruited
870 successfully
contacted and
screened
601 included in
analysis

Use of Primary Care
Quality-Homeless
(PCQ-H) Survey
previously
developed.
3 phases of analysis
using chi square,
ANOVA and
regression

Patientclinician
relationship
Cooperation
among
clinicians
Accessibility
or
coordination
Homelessspecific needs

Patient-clinician
relationship and
perceptions of
cooperation among
providers were
highest where
homeless-tailoring
was most
pronounced.
Higher levels of
tailoring associated
with a better
experience.
An unfavorable
experience was 1.5 to
2 times more
common at the
mainstream VA sites
compared with the
tailored non-VA site.

Institutional barriers
leading to service
fragmentation for
homeless veterans due to
geographical barriers and
waiting times can be
improved with co-location
of services and one intake
system offered on same
day basis.
The blending of traditional
primary care and homeless
care can lead to quicker
services for veterans and
improve access to medical
care, mental health
treatment and social
services.
Tailored primary care
service delivery is
associated with superior
service experience for
patients who experience
homelessness.
More research to better
understand which aspects
of service tailoring matter
most and whether they can
be translated across
service environments for
both homeless and nonhomeless populations.

!

101!
!

!
McGuire, Gelberg
& Blue-Howells,
2009
Access to primary
care for homeless
veterans with
serious mental
illness or substance
abuse: a follow-up
evaluation of colocated primary
care and homeless
social services

To determine that a
demonstration
clinic integrating
homeless, primary
care and mental
health services for
homeless veterans
with serious mental
illness or substance
abuse would
improve medical
health care access
and physical health
status

Quasiexperimental
design
Comparing
usual VA care
group before the
demonstration
clinic opened
and the
integrated care
group.
2 hour
structured based
interview used
and repeated at
6, 12 and 18
months after
enrollment.

Pre and post
integration
groups recruited
from waiting
room of
Homeless DropIn Center.
130 veterans
recruited to each
arm of study.

O’Toole,
Bourgault,
Johnson,
Redihan, Borgia,
Aiello & Kane,
2013
New to care:
demands on a
health system when
homeless veterans
are enrolled in a
medical home
model

To compare service
use among
homeless and nonhomeless veterans
newly enrolled in a
medical home
model and
identified patters of
use among
homeless veterans
associated with
reductions in
emergency
department use.

Case-control
matching with
nested cohort
analysis to
measure 6month health
services use,
new diagnoses,
and care use
patterns in
veterans at
Providence, RI
VAMC.

127 homeless
veterans
106 nonhomeless
veterans
New patients to
the RI VAMC
who enrolled in
primary care and
had at least 2
visits with their
primary care
team within the
first 6 months of
enrollment.

!

Bivariate analysis
comparing baseline
characteristics and
follow-up interview
completion rates.
Regression analyses
compared groups on
initial timeliness of
access to primary
care, 12 month
receipt of prevention
services and 18
month use and
number of VA
primary care
outpatient visits, ED
visits and inpatient
stays.
Mixed regression
model compared
outcomes for 30 day
physical health status
at baseline 6, 12 and
18 months.
Homeless compared
with non-homeless in
regards to medical,
mental health and
substance abuse
conditions.

102!
!

Sociodemogra
phic
characteristics
, VA service
connection,
social
support,
competing
health and
non-health
needs,
physical and
mental health,
use of
preventative
health
services.

Patient
demographic
characteristics
, sheltering
status at
baseline and
at end of 6
months,
comorbid
medical,
mental health
and substance
abuse
conditions at
baseline; new
diagnoses in
these
categories
during 6
months; and
health service

Veterans in colocated and actively
coordinated services
received primary care
appointments more
quickly, had higher
levels of preventative
services, and lower
levels of ED use than
veterans in standard
care group.
Medical treatment
and prevention
received in one
location with multineed populations can
be provided in a more
timely and effective
manner than in
disconnected clinics.
No significant
improvement in
physical health status
over 18 months.
Almost all veterans
in both groups had a
chronic medical
condition, with the
homeless group
having more
conditions per
person.
Most common
conditions in both
groups were
depression, anxiety
disorder, PTSD, and
bipolar disorder.
48% of the homeless
cohort accessed the
ED, averaging 2
visits per person over
the 6 month period.
Those homeless that
utilized primary care

Integrating medical
treatment with homeless
and mental health services
can improve the quality of
medical care for homeless
people with serious mental
illness or substance abuse.
Further research needed to
determine generalizability
beyond homeless veterans
and longer term effects
(beyond 18 mos.)

Need to consider the
unmet health needs of
disadvantaged populations
in health systems planning.
Providing an alternate
setting with enhanced
access, population-tailored
approach and high
intensity treatment
engagement to receive
care can reduce ED visits
(expensive) rather than
case management through
the ED.
More research is needed to
better understand
treatment engagement in
this vulnerable population.

!
utilization
patterns.
O’Toole, Buckel,
Bourgault,
Blumen, Redihan,
Jiang &
Friedmann, 2010
Applying chronic
care model to
homeless veterans:
effect of a
population
approach to
primary care
utilization and
clinical outcomes

To determine
whether a
population-tailored
approach to how
primary care is
organized and
delivered to
homeless veterans
is associated with
better health care
and utilization
outcomes

O’Toole,
Pirraglia, Dosa,
Bourgault,
Redihan, O’Toole
& Blumen, 2011
Building care
systems to improve
access for high-risk
and vulnerable
veteran populations

Is a population
based patient
centered medical
home model better
than a traditional
patient care
approach

!

Retrospective
prolective
cohort study
comparing 12month chronic
disease
management
outcomes and
health services
utilization
among
homeless
patients enrolled
in the
HomelessOriented
Primary Care
Clinic against
historical
sample of
homeless
patients seen in
the general
internal
medicine clinics
Quasiexperimental
pre and post
analysis of
patients enrolled
in specialpopulation
medical home in
2008 who was
previously
enrolled in
primary care
clinic in 2006

177 patients
included in
study
79 consecutively
enrolled patients
from the HOPC
98 controls from
general internal
medicine clinic

Used electronic
medical record in the
Veterans Health
Administration
Tracked 3 most
prevalent chronic
disease conditions:
HTN,
DM, HLD

HTN, DM,
HLD changes
Primary care
visits
ED visits
Hospitalizatio
ns

457 patients
identified
71 homeless
167 geriatric
145 women
74 serious
mental illness

Use VA electronic
record
Primary care visits
ED visits
Inpatient stays
-all pre and post
enrollment in medical
home

HTN, DM,
HLD chronic
disease
management
measures

103!
!

services were more
likely to have no ED
use in the latter 3
months of the study.
Homeless veterans
accessing populationtailored primary care
model had
significantly more
primary care visits
and fewer medical
admissions than did
those homeless
persons attending a
traditional general
internal medicine
clinic.
How primary care is
organized and
delivered to homeless
persons is important
variable in improving
chronic disease
management

Patient aligned care
teams specific for
vulnerable
populations can
increase their
engagement in an
access to primary
care and improve
their chronic disease
monitoring and
management
outcomes.

Tailoring primary care to
homeless veterans can
decrease unnecessary ED
use and medical
admissions and improve
chronic disease
management.
Can also reduce ED
overcrowding and overall
disease burden among
chronic homeless

Tailoring the medical
home model to the specific
needs and challenges
facing high-risk
populations can increase
primary care utilization
and improve chronic
disease monitoring and
diabetes management.
More work is

!

Understanding the Health of Veterans Who Are Homeless:
A Focused Literature Review
Jillian Weber RN, MSN, CNL
PhD Candidate
University of Cincinnati
College of Nursing

!

104!
!

!
Abstract
The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development estimates that almost 50,000
veterans are homeless on any given night. Homeless veterans are at greater risk of health
disparities than their housed counterparts due to the multifactorial nature of their health and
social needs. The Department of Veterans Affairs, in collaboration with more than a dozen other
federal agencies, has concentrated efforts to improve the health of this vulnerable population
while enacting a plan to eliminate veteran homelessness within the near future. Understanding
the unique health needs of veterans who are homeless allows the profession of nursing and other
healthcare providers to better support these efforts.

!

105!
!

!
Homelessness is associated with poorer health status. Maintaining health and recovering
from disease is especially challenging for this population because more energy is expended on
the attempt to satisfy basic human needs such as food, shelter, and safety. In the United States,
over half a million people lack housing on any given night (Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), 2015) putting them at risk for higher rates of communicable and noncommunicable diseases, multiple co-morbidities, and higher mortality rates (Schanzer,
Dominguez, Shrout, & Canton, 2007). Additionally, homeless individuals tend to overutilize
emergency rooms, underutilize primary care services, and require longer lengths of stay at higher
acuities as inpatients (O’Toole et al., 2010).
Rates of homelessness have remained consistently higher in the veteran population than
non-veteran populations. With over 21 million veterans living in the U.S today, they make up
6.7% of the population (United States Census Bureau, 2015). However, veterans make up 11%
of the adult homeless population in the U.S. (Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), 2105). Veteran status, older age, and black race are all significantly and independently
associated with risk of homelessness among men and women (Fargo et al., 2012). Additionally,
male veterans are almost 50% more likely to be homeless as male non-veterans in the general
population (Fargo et al., 2012). Homeless veterans are at a high risk of compromised health
status requiring more specific health needs and a greater understanding by healthcare providers.
Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to provide in-depth knowledge to nurses and other
healthcare providers about the lives and health status of homeless veterans.
Homelessness Defined
Various government organizations and stakeholders define homelessness differently.
Universally, the contemporary view of being homeless has to do with housing status and is

!

106!
!

!
linked to a state of extreme poverty. The United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) defines homelessness more broadly as an individual who lacks housing or whose
primary residence during the night is a facility that provides temporary living arrangements. A
homeless person may live on the streets or in any other non-permanent situation (i.e. car,
abandoned building). HHS also considers those to be homeless who are unable to maintain their
own housing situation and may be forced to live “doubled-up” with family or friends (National
Healthcare for the Homeless Council, 2014).
The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) approaches
homelessness from a more limited viewpoint by defining it as individuals who lack a fixed,
regular, and adequate nighttime residence or whose primary residence is a place not ordinarily
used for routine sleeping accommodations for human beings. The United States Department of
Veteran Affairs (VA) defines homelessness very similarly to HUD by including those who lack a
fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence. However, HUD and VA do not consider those
who are “doubled-up” to be homeless. Health centers and organizations funded by any of the
previously mentioned government organizations or others will generally utilize either the HUD
definition of homelessness or the definition of the funding agency.
Antecedents of Homelessness
Homelessness is generally caused by the inability to pay for housing. Multiple factors
contribute to this inability to pay including both economic and personal. Causes of homelessness
can be classified into macro and micro level factors (Lee, Tyler, & Wright, 2010). Macro level
causes create a broader view that include the overall economic conditions of the country
including a decrease in the median household income, rates of unemployment, lack of fair
market housing or an increase in fair market rent, and policy shifts that decrease spending on

!

107!
!

!
public assistance (National Alliance to End Homelessness, 2013). Other macro level risk factors
could be contributed to environmental causes such as natural (i.e. tornado, hurricane) or manmade disasters (i.e. war) that could force people into a state of homelessness. On the other hand,
micro level factors include those occurring at the individual or family level such as lack of
education leading to low skilled labor, altered physical and/or mental health status, or a difficult
family situation such as those who come from foster care, experience domestic violence, or
incarceration (Lee et al., 2010).
While the previously discussed antecedents of homelessness also apply to homeless
veterans, because of their military experience and specialized training, additional risk factors are
present. In a landmark study conducted by Rosenheck and Fontana (1994), four predisposing
factors were found to increase the risk of homelessness among veterans including: low levels of
social support, psychiatric disorders, substance abuse disorders, and being unmarried. Social
isolation and lack of social support after returning to civilian life are two of the most significant
preceding indicators (Nyamathi et al., 2004; Rosenheck & Fontana, 1994). Also, their extremely
specialized military training may not translate into the civilian workforce and further solidify
their unemployment status (Nyamathi et al., 2004).
Health Status of Homeless Veterans
Homeless populations in the U.S. are impacted by the burden of disease more heavily
than other populations. They experience higher mortality rates (Schanzer et al., 2007), have
higher rates of acute and chronic medical illness, have greater unmet health needs (Baggett et al.,
2010), and have higher rates of emergency visits and acute hospitals stays at a greater cost
(Kushel, Vittinghoff, & Haas, 2001). Veterans contend with more social issues and with a
complex health status consisting of multiple physical and mental health co-morbidities that all

!

108!
!

!
contribute to their homeless position. They are also more likely to have greater diagnosed
medical conditions than the general population (Agha, Lofgren, VanRuiswyk, and Layde, 2000).
When comparing homeless male veterans to homeless male non-veterans, significant differences
in health status are found. Looking at the characteristics, comorbid conditions, and usual sources
of care it was found that homeless male veterans were significantly more likely to report a
chronic medical condition, two or more mental health conditions, and less likely to access
community health centers for care than male non-veterans (O’Toole et al., 2003). Additionally,
PTSD and hepatitis/cirrhosis were reported at higher rates among homeless veterans than
homeless non-veterans (O’Toole et al., 2003).
Differences are also present when focusing specifically on the veteran population.
Homeless VA Medical Center (VAMC) emergency department users are more likely to be
younger, have hepatic disease or HIV/AIDS, and more likely to be diagnosed with a broad range
of psychiatric disorders including substance abuse and schizophrenia than their non-homeless
veteran counterparts (Tsai, Doran, & Rosenheck, 2013). As in the general population, having
housing is linked with increased health status and decrease cost of healthcare services among the
veteran population. One study found that by supporting permanent housing, not only do rates of
homelessness decrease, but also associated health care utilization rates, cost of emergency care,
and inpatient hospitalizations (Montgomery, Hill, Kane, & Culhane, 2013).
Based upon these findings, we can conclude that not only do veterans have poorer health
status than non-veterans, but also that homeless veterans have even poorer health status than
housed veterans. Additionally, social isolation, lack of health care service utilization, and the
basic lack of housing contribute to their poor health status. Since evidence shows that homeless
veterans are more likely to use the emergency department, an opportunity exists for nurses and

!

109!
!

!
other healthcare providers to provide specialized services and comprehensive discharge planning
to this unique population.
Homeless Veterans and Chronic Disease
Homeless veterans face both chronic physical and chronic mental health disorders that
are multifactorial in nature and do not necessarily fit into any defined health framework. When
examining these multiple health problems, there have been attempts made to categorize
identified co-morbidities into certain groups depending on their pattern of occurrence in this
unique subpopulation. By making these distinct categorizations nurses, healthcare providers,
advocates, and other stakeholders can better understand what services might be appropriate for
each group and identify ways to achieve cost effective preventative care rather than retroactive
treatment (i.e. inpatient hospitalizations). Three notable studies (Goldstein, Luther, Jacoby, Haas,
& Gordon, 2008; Goldstein, Luther, Haas, Appelt, & Gordon, 2010; Tsai, Kasprow &
Rosenheck, 2013) looked to identify these types and patterns of medical and mental illness found
in homeless veterans.
Goldstein et al. (2008) not only identified patterns of illness, but also looked to determine
if risk profiles based on sociodemographic characteristics and duration of homelessness could be
related to the identified illness patterns. Results showed four unique clusters that best fit the data
including: (1) oral, dental and orthopedic disorders (dental/orthopedic problems); (2) eye
problems, hypertension, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal disorders (generalized illness); (3)
hepatic and gastrointestinal disorders (hepatic disorders); and (4) hypertension with secondary
elevations of cardiovascular and pulmonary disorders (cardiopulmonary disease). Additionally,
over 75% of the cases in each cluster also had at least one psychiatric disorder (Goldstein et al.,
2008).

!

110!
!

!
In another study by Goldstein and colleagues (2010), a configuration similar to previous
findings resulting in a multifactorial pattern rather than the presence of single disorders among
homeless veterans was found. A five-factor solution showed: (1) cardiopulmonary disease
without significant psychiatric disorder; (2) mood disorders associated with orthopedic, eye and
gastrointestinal problems; (3) stress related disorders; (4) substance use or addiction disorders;
and (5) psychosis among homeless veterans. Additionally, it was found that married participants
were more likely to score lower on the addiction factor than unmarried participants.
The final study examined risk and need profiles of homeless veterans and evaluated how
they were referred to certain homeless service programs within the VA system. Researchers
examined data from the VA’s Homeless Operations Management and Evaluation System
(HOMES), which was designed in response to the current administrations goal to end veteran
homelessness. This included data from 142 sites nationally and 120,852 veterans (Tsai, Kasprow,
et al., 2013). Four classes of risk were identified and then compared to sociodemographic
characteristics among the participants. The four classes identified include: (1) relatively few
problems; (2) dual diagnosis; (3) poverty, substance abuse and incarceration; and (4) disabling
medical problems. The group identified as having relatively few problems was significantly
younger, more likely to be female, more likely to be married, and had more years of education
than the other groups. The disabling medical problems group was most likely to have a chronic
medical condition, be older, and most likely to be unemployed in the past three years. The
veterans categorized into the dual diagnosis group had the highest rates of substance abuse
disorders, psychotic disorders, and psychiatric hospitalizations (Tsai, Kasprow, et al., 2013).
Identification of these four groups contributes to a better understanding of how homeless
veterans differ from one another and what services might be the most appropriate for each group.

!

111!
!

!
In each of the three studies attempts were made to stratify the many physical and mental
health problems that homeless veterans face into various categories or groups. Even though each
study identified four or five differently named classifications, there remained significant
similarities across the groups. Working to identify the complex health patterns of homeless
veterans creates the need for a diverse approach in services for homeless veterans in both the VA
system and the community. Additionally, broader knowledge about common comorbid
associations and a better understanding of the high correlation of substance use disorders with
the majority of problems among homeless veterans will help to enhance the design and delivery
of health programs. This is a significant challenge to nursing and other healthcare professionals
to address the multidimensional and complex needs associated with this population.
Homeless Veterans and Emergency Department Utilization
Individuals who are homeless not only have more complex health care needs than those
who are housed, but they also have higher hospitalization rates and emergency department (ED)
visits than the general population, often using this as a primary source of care due to its ease and
accessibility. Because veterans have access to more personal resources than other homeless
subpopulations, and having health insurance does not necessarily play a role in their care (VA
medical system), more significance can be placed on their use of emergency departments as a
primary source of care (Tessler, Rosenheck, & Gamache, 2002).
One of the most significant sociodemographic characteristics found among a sample of
those who use the VA emergency department was homelessness (Doran et al., 2013).
Specifically, homeless veterans were 6.6 times more likely to be amongst the most frequent
emergency department users. Other factors strongly associated with emergency department use
include schizophrenia, opioid prescription use, and heart failure (Doran et al., 2013). Another

!

112!
!

!
study showed that homelessness was ten times higher in the sample of veterans treated and
released from emergency departments and was a predictor of repeat visits and hospitalizations
(Hastings et al., 2011). Homeless veterans also face challenges with obtaining medications,
arranging outpatient and follow-up care, and securing transportation (Hastings et al., 2011).
Additionally, their higher severity of illness and lack of social support places them at an
increased risk of return to emergency departments.
The general characteristics of homelessness increase the likelihood of an individual using
an emergency department for health care, rather than some other source (i.e. ambulatory care,
primary care). The frequency with which the homeless visit emergency departments is also
higher than their housed counterparts. This overutilization of emergency departments by the
homeless contributes to overcrowding, decreases continuity of care, and compromises patient
safety (Trzeciak & Rivers, 2003). There is a significant need for better health care management
of the homeless in the emergency department including more focused screening tools, timely
follow-up care, and aggressive case management to reduce high recidivism rates and ultimately
overcrowding.
Barriers to Care for Homeless Veterans
For homeless individuals, health care can become a compromising factor. The basic
human requirements of food, shelter, and safety are often placed at the forefront in regards to
daily needs rather than health associated needs. However, additional patient-related and
institutional-related barriers to health care exist for the homeless, and explicitly homeless
veterans, making access to healthcare and care management that much more problematic.
Physical health, mental health, substance abuse problems, and self-esteem issues are major
obstacles to overcoming homelessness for veterans (Applewhite, 1997). Furthermore, veterans

!

113!
!

!
who experienced combat duty while serving in the military were more likely to report
experiencing psychosocial and psychiatric problems that preclude them from escaping
homelessness. Veterans also feel there is a stigma associated with being homeless in that the
public blames them for their life circumstances. Additionally, the VA service delivery system
can often be perceived as confusing, insensitive, and full of bureaucratic obstacles (Nyamathi et
al., 2004). Ultimately, improvements in service delivery are needed including more services to
help with reintegration into civilian life in order to become more productive and make positive
contributions to society (Applewhite, 1997).
One significant study looked at the co-location of services for homeless veterans in one
VA health care system (Greater Los Angeles) in order to reduce patient-related barriers and
institution-related barriers (Blue-Howells, McGuire, &Nakashima, 2008). Many homeless
veterans lack needed transportation to multiple scheduled appointments and those appointments
were scheduled at various times and on various days. A new program offered the same day colocated mental health, medical, and homeless services with a coordinated intake system. When
evaluating this new innovative system, continuity and rapidity of care were found to be promoted
by the creation of an access center for homeless veterans that conducted screening, assessment,
and referral to all services on a one-stop basis. The program reduced patient-related barriers such
as transportation (one-stop service) and lack of health insurance (VA system) while also
reducing institution-related barriers such as service fragmentation (coordinated intake system).
The results showed that the unique blending of traditional primary care services with homeless
care lead to quicker services for the homeless veterans and improve access to medical care,
mental health, and social services (Blue-Howells et al., 2008). It also reduced the need for

!

114!
!

!
homeless veterans to explain their situation to multiple care providers producing feelings of
weakness and discrimination.
The patient-related barriers, institutional-related barriers, and VA specific barriers
discussed all have an effect of the healthcare management of homeless veterans. Even though
homeless veterans may have access to more healthcare resources than the general homeless
population because of their veteran status, many do not necessarily utilize the VA system in
order to obtain health care services (Agha et al., 2000; Nyamathi et al., 2004). Often a homeless
veteran’s own perception and experiences within the military cause the largest barrier to
receiving needed care. Creating a unique health care system for homeless veterans that combines
their primary care treatment with homeless care services (Blue-Howells et al., 2008) is one way
to potentially reduce the various barriers to care that they face.
Models of Care for Improving Health of Homeless Veterans
After defining veteran homelessness, examining the health status of homeless veterans,
where they access care, and barriers to care, it is important to examine what research
recommendations have been made that demonstrate innovative models or programs of care to
improve the health of homeless veterans. Recommendations from successful studies and
programs across the United States can provide a constructive contribution to reducing this
phenomenon and help educate nurses and other healthcare professionals involved in the care of
homeless veterans.
Two different studies (McGuire, Gelberg, Blue-Howells, & Rosenheck, 2009; O’Toole et
al., 2011) looked at new models for providing integrated health care to homeless veterans. The
first study (McGuire et al., 2009), investigated whether a demonstration clinic integrating
homeless, primary care, and mental health services for homeless veterans with serious mental

!

115!
!

!
illness or substance abuse would improve medical care access and physical health status.
Outcomes indicated that veterans in the integrated care group received primary care
appointments more quick, had higher levels of preventive care and lower levels of emergency
department use than veterans in the traditional group. These findings suggest that an integrated
model of care can improve the quality of medical care for the homeless and particularly the
homeless with serious mental illness.
The second study compared outcomes between a population-based patient-centered
medical home (PCMH) model of care and a traditional patient care approach (O’Toole et
al.,2011). The PCMH model used seven core principles to provide population specific care.
These care principles include: patient driven, team-based, efficient, comprehensive, continuous,
honest and respectful communication, and coordination across all aspects of the health care
system (O’Toole et al., 2011). Findings showed that enrollment in a population-specific PCMH
can increase participant’s engagement in access to primary care and improve their chronic
disease monitoring and management outcomes. By tailoring the PCMH model to the specific
needs of a vulnerable population (i.e. homeless veterans) there is the potential for improvement
of care and increased utilization of care resources, which improves overall health outcomes and
quality of life (O’Toole et al., 2011).
Another study using a population-specific design to deliver primary care services
compared homeless patients’ experiences of care in healthcare organizations that differed in their
degree of primary care service delivery (Kertesz et al., 2013). Patient experiences were compared
at five different sites that varied in their degree of primary care services with results indicating
that tailoring primary care service delivery to the homeless is associated with superior experience
by the patients and results in improved perception and cooperation between providers and

!

116!
!

!
patients. Ultimately, an unfavorable experience is more common at mainstream sites where no
population-specific tailoring of services occurs (Kertesz et al., 2013).
A final study compared service use among the homeless and non-homeless veterans
newly enrolled in a medical model home service delivery system during a 6-month period
(O’Toole et al., 2013). Homeless veterans were enrolled in the homeless-specific patient-aligned
care team while the non-homeless were enrolled in the general population patient-aligned care
team. Homeless veterans were compared with non-homeless veterans in regards to their medical
health, mental health, and substance abuse conditions. Initially, 48% of the homeless cohort
accessed the emergency department for care. However, results showed that the homeless who
utilized primary cares services were more likely to have no emergency department use in the
latter 3 months of the study. By providing an alternative setting with enhanced access and a
population-tailored approach (homeless-specific), a reduction in expensive emergency
department visits and unmet health needs of vulnerable populations can occur (O’Toole, et al.,
2013).
All studies suggest the need for a comprehensive population-tailored approach to
providing healthcare to homeless veterans. Co-locating medical care, psychiatric care, and
homeless services results in improved access to healthcare and social services in a timelier and
efficient manner. Using integrated primary care models provide optimal continuity of care for
veterans’ multiple co-morbidities and potentially specialized situation. The majority of these
recommendations are tailored to the VA system, but can also be applicable to other civilian
healthcare systems. Since the VA is nationwide, it is able to represent our country’s diverse
population and the various frameworks can simply be modified to fit the needs of other
healthcare institutions. The most noteworthy recommendations to improve the health of the

!

117!
!

!
homeless, require combining resources in one location and using a comprehensive integrated
primary care approach that can be generalizable across all homeless populations. Moreover,
working to provide continuity of care for homeless veterans may increase their own personal
engagement in their health and consequently improve their overall quality of life.
Implications for Public Health Nursing
The profession of nursing provides frontline delivery of care to the homeless in hospitals,
clinics, and countless environments across the public health sector. Nurses are often the first to
interact with homeless individuals and therefore have an increased ability to influence their
healthcare outcomes and overall quality of life. Since nursing often utilizes a more holistic
approach to healthcare delivery, there is a greater potential for understanding and ultimately
impact on the multiple medical, psychiatric, and social needs that homeless veterans face.
Recommendations from the literature include comprehensive discharge planning from the
emergency department (Tsai et al., 2013), increasing social support to prevent repeat emergency
department visits and inpatient stays (Hastings et al., 2011), and utilizing a population-based
approach to providing primary care services to homeless veterans (McGuire et al., 2009). The
nursing profession is highly capable of implementing these recommendations and collaborating
with others in order to promote health, reduce disparities, and improve the life of veterans who
are homeless.
Conclusions
Homeless veterans face numerous barriers to receiving suitable healthcare services. They
have higher rates of physical illness, mental illness, and substance abuse. They are also more
likely to utilize emergency rooms, be admitted to the hospital at a younger age, and have longer
lengths of stay at a greater cost (O’Toole et al., 2010). All of these factors lead to a higher age-

!

118!
!

!
adjusted mortality rate for the homeless, (Adams et al., 2007) which further increases the impact
of the problem of homelessness on the public health domain. Additionally, veterans suffer from
higher rates of chronic disease and co-morbidities than the general population (Goldstein et al.,
2008). This creates an additional burden on homeless veterans because they are competing for
resources such as shelter, food, and safety while potentially battling a chronic health condition.
In order to improve the overall health of homeless veterans, best practice recommendations from
the literature can be used by the profession of nursing and other healthcare providers to improve
the public health framework.

!

119!
!

!
References
Agha, Z., Lofgren, R.P., VanRuiswyk, J.V. & Layde, P.M. (2000). Are patients at veterans
affairs medical center sicker. Archives of Internal Medicine, 160, 3252-3257.
Applewhite, S.L. (1997). Homeless veterans: Perspectives on social services use. Social Work,
42(1), 19-30.
Blue-Howells, J., McGuire, J. & Nakashima, J. (2008). Co-location of health care services for
homeless veterans: A case study of innovation program implementation. Social Work in
Health Care, 47(3), 219-231.
Doran, K.M., Raven, M.C. & Rosenheck R.A. (2013). What drives frequent emergency
department use in an integrated health system? National data from the veterans health
administration. Annuals of Emergency Medicine, 62(2), 151-159.
Fargo, J., Metraux, S., Byrne, T., Munley, E., Montgomery, A.E., Jones, H.,…Culhane, D.
(2012). Prevalence and risk of homelessness among us veterans. Preventing Chronic
Disease, 9.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Haas, G.L., Appelt, C.J. & Gordon, A.J. (2010). Factor structure and
risk factors for the health status of homeless veterans. Psychiatric Quarterly, 81, 311323.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Jacoby, A.M. & Haas, G.L. (2008). A taxonomy of medical
comorbidity for veterans who are homeless. The Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
Underserved, 19(3), 991-1005.
Hastings, S.N., Smith, V.A., Weinberger, M., Schmader, K.E., Olsen, M.K. & Oddone, E.Z.
(2011). Emergency department visits in veterans affairs medical facilities. The American
Journal of Managed Care, 17(6), 215-223.

!

120!
!

!
Kertesz, S.G., Holt, C.L., Steward, J.L., Jones, R.N., Roth, D.L., Stringfellow, E.,…Pollio, D.E.
(2013). Comparing homeless persons’ care experiences in tailored versus nontailored
primary care programs. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S331-S339.
Kushel, M.B., Vittinghoff, E. & Haas, J.S. (2001). Factors associated with the health care
utilization of homeless persons. Journal of the American Medical Association, 285(2),
200-206.
Lee, B.A., Tyler, K.A. & Wright, J.D. (2010). The new homelessness revisited. Annual Review
of Sociology, 36, 501-521.
McGuire, J., Gelberg, L., Blue-Howells, J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2009). Access to primary care
for homeless veterans with serious mental illness or substance abuse: A follow-up
evaluation of co-located primary care and homeless social services. Administration,
Policy and Mental Health, 36, 255-264.
Montgomery, A.E., Hill, L.L., Kane, V. & Culhane, D.P. (2013). Housing chronically homeless
veterans: Evaluating the efficacy of a housing first approach to HUD-VASH. Journal of
Community Psychology, 41, 505-514.
National Alliance to End Homelessness. (2013). The state of homelessness in America 2013.
National Healthcare for the Homeless Council. (2014). Retrieved from
http://www.nhchc.org/faq/official-definition-homelessness/
Nyamathi, A., Sands, H., Pattatucci-Aragon, A., Berg, J., Leake, B., Hahn, J.E. & Morisky, D.
(2003). Perception of health status by homeless U.S. veterans. Family Community Health,
27(1), 65-74.

!

121!
!

!
O’Toole, T.P., Bourgault, C., Johnson, E.E., Redihan, S.G., Borgia, M., Aiello, R. & Kane, V.
(2013). New to care: Demands on a health system when homeless veterans are enrolled in
a medical model home. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S374-S379.
O’Toole, T.P., Buckel, L., Bourgault, C., Blumen, J., Redihan, S.G., Jiang, L., & Friedmann, P.
(2010). Applying the chronic care model to homeless veterans: Effect of a population
approach to primary care on utilization and clinical outcomes. American Journal of
Public Health, 100(12), 2493-2499.
O’Toole, T.P., Conde-Martel, A., Gibbon, J.L., Hanusa, B.H. & Fine, M.J. (2003). Health care of
homeless veterans: Why are some individuals falling through the safety net? Journal of
General Internal Medicine, 18, 929-933.
O’Toole, T.P., Pirraglia, P.A., Dosa, D., Bourgault, C. Redihan, S., O’Toole, M.B. & Blumen, J.
(2011). Building care systems to improve access for high-risk and vulnerable veteran
populations. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 26, 683-688.
Rosenheck, R. & Fontana, A. (1994). A model of homelessness among male veterans of the
Vietnam war generation. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 151(3), 421-427.
Schanzer, B., Dominguez, B., Shrout, P.E. & Canton, C.L.M. (2007). Homelessness, health
status, and health care use. American Journal of Public Health, 97(3), 464-469.
Tessler, R., Rosenheck, R. & Gamache, G. (2002). Comparison of homeless veterans with other
homeless men in a large clinical outreach program. Psychiatric Quarterly, 73(2), 109119.
Trzeciak, S. & Rivers, E.P. (2003). Emergency department overcrowding in the United States:
An emerging threat to patient safety and public health. Emergency Medicine Journal, 20,
402-405.

!

122!
!

!
Tsai, J., Doran, K.M. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2013). When health insurance is not a factor: National
comparison of homeless and nonhomeless us veterans who use veterans affairs
emergency departments. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S225-S231.
Tsai, J., Kasprow, W.J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2013). Latent homeless risk profiles of a national
sample of homeless veterans and their relation to program referral and admission
patterns. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S239-S247.
Tsai, J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2013). Risk factors for ED use among homeless veterans. American
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 31, 855-858.
United States Census Bureau. (2015). A snapshot of our nations veterans. Retrieved from:
http://www.census.gov/library/infographics/veterans.html
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. (2015). The 2015 annual
homeless assessment report (AHAR) to congress. Retrieved from:
https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/2015-AHAR-Part-1.pdf
United States Department of Veterans Affairs: Office of Inspector General. (2012). Homeless
incidence and risk factors for becoming homeless in veterans. Retrieved from:
http://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-11-03428-173.pdf

!

123!
!

!

A Theory of Chronic Disease Management
Among Male Homeless Veterans
Jillian Weber RN, MSN, CNL
PhD Candidate
Beta Iota Chapter
University of Cincinnati
College of Nursing
Acknowledgements
This research study was supported by a VA VISN 10 Research Initiative Program Grant

!

124!
!

!
Abstract
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to develop theory to describe the process by which
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems. In the United States, over 550,000
people will experience homelessness on any given night. Of these over 11% are veterans, many
of whom suffer from at least one chronic disease. Homeless veterans face numerous barriers to
receiving optimal healthcare and often overutilize emergency departments and underutilize
primary care services.
Design: This qualitative study used grounded theory methodology with a sample of homeless
veterans from one large Midwestern city in the US.
Methods: Participants included male veterans who were homeless with at least one chronic
disease. Recruitment was completed at a VA emergency department, a homeless shelter, and a
soup kitchen.!Audio recorded interviews were verified and then coded by a research team using
line-by-line, substantive, and finally theoretical coding.
Findings:!Semi-structured interviews with 32 participants resulted in a theory describing and
explaining four different ways homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems amidst
the competing demands of daily survival.
Conclusions & Clinical Relevance: In order to end veteran homelessness, it is vital that
healthcare providers and policy makers first seek understanding from the individuals living this
experience. The findings from this study will help guide the future delivery of healthcare to
homeless veterans including how the profession of nursing can best care and support this
vulnerable population in hospitals, clinics, and across the public health sector.

Key words: homelessness, veterans, chronic disease, theory

!

125!
!

!
In the United States over half a million people are homeless on any given night (Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD), 2015). Homelessness is associated with poorer health
status due to the difficulty of maintaining health while attempting to satisfy the basic human
needs such as food, shelter, and safety. These individuals suffer from higher rates of
communicable and non-communicable diseases, higher mortality rates, and multiple comorbidities (Schanzer, Dominguez, Shrout, & Caton, 2007). They often overuse emergency
services, underuse primary care services, and require longer lengths of stay as inpatients
compared to the general population (Kushel, Vittinghoff, & Haas, 2001; O’Toole et al., 2010).
Veterans of military service are overrepresented in the homeless population, accounting for 11%
(or 48,000) of homeless adults (436,000) (HUD, 2015). Rates of homelessness have remained
consistently higher in the veteran population, with male veterans 50% more likely to be homeless
than male non-veterans (Fargo et al., 2012). Veterans have an increased risk of compromised
health status because of their greater representation among this vulnerable population.
Homeless veterans suffer from higher rates of chronic disease and co-morbidities than
their non-veteran counterparts (Goldstein, Luther, Jacoby, & Haas, 2008) with over half
suffering from at least one chronic health condition (Fargo et al., 2012). Physical and mental
disorders experienced by homeless veterans are heterogeneous and do not necessarily fit any
defined health framework. Their complex pattern of health contains components of both chronic
medical and chronic psychiatric health problems. Common medical problems experienced by
homeless veterans include diabetes, hypertension, cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), and heart disease (Goldstein, Luther, Haas, Appelt, & Gordon, 2010). Common
psychiatric problems include depression, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
schizophrenia, and substance abuse disorders (Goldstein et al., 2010; Tsai, Mares, & Rosenheck,

!

126!
!

!
2012). Other illnesses such as ulcers, frostbite, and malnutrition can be attributed to the general
aspects of homelessness and exposure to the elements. Given the large number of homeless
veterans, there is a significant challenge to healthcare professionals, and the general public health
domain to address the multidimensional and complex health needs of this population.
Barriers to optimal healthcare among homeless populations are widely documented. Lack
of affordable healthcare (Tsai & Rosenheck, 2014), service fragmentation among healthcare
institutions and providers (Blue-Howells, McGuire, & Nakashima, 2008), and transportation all
create obstacles to care (Nyamathi et al., 2003). Other barriers exist for veterans including a
complicated eligibility process within the VA system causing great difficulty for veterans to
navigate (Blue-Howells et al., 2008) and therefore, seen as a stressor rather than a benefit. In
addition, a common misconception is that all health care at the VA is free for veterans but this is
not necessarily true. Services may still require co-pays and be billable depending on a veterans
eligibility status and insurance. Finally, veteran’s own perceptions of their health can influence
their ability to access care. Utilizing health care services can be perceived as a weakness, which
is sharply contrasted with their military way of life in which they are perceived as strong (Gilliss,
2010).
In 2009 President Obama, along with the former VA Secretary Eric Shinseki, set a goal
of ending chronic and veteran homelessness by focusing on six areas including: education and
outreach, treatment, prevention, housing and supportive services, employment and benefits, and
community partnerships (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness, 2010). This
comprehensive plan further highlights the need to address national homelessness among the
veteran population and make positive contributions to reduce this phenomenon. These combined
factors create multiple questions about the lives and experiences of homeless veterans living with

!

127!
!

!
chronic diseases and contribute to the foundation for this study. The goal of this grounded theory
study was to develop a theory to describe and explain how veterans who are homeless manage
their chronic health problems. The research question was: What is the process by which
homeless veterans manage their chronic health problems?
Methods
Grounded theory methods were used to answer the research question in this study (Glaser
& Strauss, 1967). Glaser and Strauss successfully merged their philosophical traditions of
positivism and pragmatism with influence from Herbert Blumer’s (1969) theoretical concept of
symbolic interactionism to develop theory that is “grounded” in the research data and able to
explain real world phenomenon (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). The population of veterans in this
study shares the same fundamental problem of being homeless, while also suffering from some
chronic disease. This is a “real world” phenomenon as described by Glaser and Strauss (1967)
that can be explained by data generated through the grounded theory process. The focus of this
inquiry was to determine how homeless veterans resolve the problem of disease management
through a social or psychological process. Homeless male veterans with at least one diagnosed
chronic health problem were recruited. Men make up 91% of the homeless veteran population
while females make up 9% (HUD, 2015). Homeless female veterans were excluded from the
study because of their low representation and therefore low accessibility rate.
Recruitment
Institutional Review Board and VA Research and Development Committee approval was
obtained. Detailed study announcements were posted at three locations in one large Midwestern
city including a VA medical center emergency department, an emergency shelter, and a soup
kitchen. Additionally, the principal investigator made visits to the soup kitchen during meal

!

128!
!

!
times and to the shelter during bimonthly veteran-specific meetings for face-to-face recruitment.
All potential participants were screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria, provided with
detailed information about the study, and any questions or concerns were answered. Written
informed consent and demographic information was obtained prior to interviews.
Data Collection
All interviews were conducted by the principal investigator and occurred in a private
room at each location. The principal investigator is an experienced emergency department nurse
who has worked extensively with veterans and the homeless for the past nine years. Participants
were interviewed one time and encouraged to tell their stories and experiences about managing
their chronic health problems while also being homeless. The interview began with open-ended
questions and more specific questions were asked as the theory began to emerge from the data.
This type of interview process follows the strategies of grounded theory development. Interviews
were audio-recorded and field notes were taken during each interview reflecting on the
environment, the participant’s behavior, and the context of each interview. Each participant
received a $35 gift card to a large chain grocery store for compensation of their time.
Sample
Purposive sampling at the three locations was initially used to recruit homeless male
veterans. This sampling method is consistent with grounded theory method and allowed the
principal investigator to deliberately select participants who met the inclusion criteria of being a
homeless male veteran with at least one chronic disease. Participants were recruited over a sixmonth period and ended as saturation occurred and no new information was discovered (Glaser
& Strauss, 1967). The systematic collection of data, sampling, and analysis occurred
simultaneously and then theoretical sampling was used to collect further information from

!

129!
!

!
remaining participants to enrich the developing theory. Through the use of comparative analysis,
the initial participant demographics and interviews showed that the majority of recruited veterans
were from the Vietnam/Post-Vietnam era and thus their experiences with chronic disease and
homelessness were different than veterans from the current war in Iraq and Afghanistan (n=2).
Therefore, the principal investigator and research team determined that the remaining veterans
recruited should only be from the Vietnam/Post-Vietnam era (n=32).
The final sample included 32 homeless male veterans with at least one diagnosed chronic
health problem. All participants who agreed to participate signed the informed consent and were
interviewed. The majority of the sample was African American (n=23; 72%) while the remaining
participants (n=9; 28%) identified as Caucasian. Veterans from four military branches made up
the sample including the Air Force (n=4), Army (n=18), Marines (n=5), and the Navy (n=5).
Years of military service varied with a range from 33 days to 20 years (mean=5 years). The
number of episodes of homelessness among the participants ranged from 1 to 8 (mean=3
episodes). Most of the participants lived in a shelter or short term rehabilitation center (n=28)
while the remainder were staying in their car, on the streets, or in abandoned buildings (n=4).
The most common chronic diagnoses found among the sample include chronic pain (n=17),
depression/anxiety (n=13), hypertension (n=15), substance abuse (n=20), and post-traumatic
stress disorder (n=11). Additionally, 75% (n=24) of the study participants indicated use of the
VA healthcare system and over half the veterans interviewed (n=19) reported having a primary
care provider either within the VA system or the community.
Data Analysis
Interviews were audio-taped, transcribed, and verified by the principal investigator. All
data were stored behind the protected VA firewall and were de-identified to ensure privacy and

!

130!
!

!
confidentiality. The qualitative software MAXQDA (2015) was used to assist with data analysis.
Data were analyzed by the principal investigator, a team of two experts in qualitative research,
and one BSN honors nursing student who is in the military. Substantive coding, including lineby-line coding and selective coding, was initially used (Glaser, 1978). Line-by-line coding was
completed by the principal investigator and one member of the research team on the first four
transcripts. Words, phrases, and sentences were carefully examined and then compared between
other transcripts for similarities and differences resulting in the development of sixteen initial
categories. Selective coding was then used to analyze the remaining transcripts and place all
data in the defined categories. During selective coding, the team collapsed codes and expanded
codes as the theory began to emerge and a higher level of coding, theoretical coding, was then
initiated. Theoretical coding allowed for increased abstraction of the data set resulting in the
development of the emerging theory. Comparative analysis was used throughout the process,
allowing the principal investigator and the research team to ask multiple questions of the data
and thereby determine the trajectory of the data set.
The concept of pursuing the mission was used by the research team to metaphorically
describe homeless veterans’ efforts in this study to manage their chronic health problems. The
term “mission” is a widely used military term associated with performing a specific military task
or duty and the action to be taken (Department of Defense, 2016). As theoretical coding was
being conducted, the concept of pursuing the mission was broadened by the principal
investigator and the research team. The transcripts were re-examined for evidence of various
ways that veterans use to pursue their mission of health care management resulting in the final
modifications of the theory.
Multiple methods were used in order to enhance rigor of the study findings.

!

131!
!

!
Trustworthiness or validity of the study was ensured through the use of a research team. Intersubjective agreement among the team members ensured the credibility of the findings along with
the use of direct quotes from participants (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). Transferability was ensured
by providing an adequate description of the sample and dependability of the data was fulfilled by
verification of the audiotapes by the principal investigator against the transcripts. Additionally,
confirmability was ensured in this grounded theory study by the creation of an “audit trail”
including field notes taken during interviews and written memos that described the theoretical
decisions and ideas that came from the data (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011).
Results
The way that veterans who are homeless manage their chronic health problems depends on
the manner in which they approach their health, the resources that they have access to, and how
they choose to utilize those resources. The concept of “pursuing the mission” is used to describe
and explain the four different ways homeless veterans manage their chronic health as found in
the data (see Figure 1).
Pursuing!the!
Mission!!
Deferring!the!
Mission!

Exploring!the!
Mission

Embarking!on!
the!Mission

Embracing!the!
Mission!

Figure 1: Pursuing the mission: four ways homeless veterans manage their chronic health
problems.
Deferring the Mission
Veterans who were “deferring the mission” (n=4 participants) are defined as those not
managing their chronic health problems. They have not taken the steps to actively engage in the
process of obtaining positive health outcomes and often experience multiple barriers that cause
deferment of the health mission. These include logistical barriers such as unemployment and lack
!

132!
!

!
of transportation, but also personal barriers such as lack of trust in the system, mental health
issues, and/or substance abuse. One participant described transportation barriers affecting his
ability to access the hospital in order to get his medications:
It's very difficult, because once I lost my job, it affected me as far as having bus fare to
get back and forth, because my feet are bad too and sometimes I would have to
walk…that really affects me, because I have to walk all the way to get my meds.
Veterans described lack of trust in health care providers and agencies as a reason they defer
management of their health problems. They provided descriptions of being treated negatively at
times by staff and healthcare professionals because of their life situation. One negative
experience can prevent any future attempts at accessing healthcare. One participant described
attempting to go to a health clinic and the manner in which he was treated:
It was frustrating. People were unprofessional, disrespectful. They had no idea what they
were doing. They were under-trained and underpaid and it showed and I see these type of
things, plain as day, but if you somehow show them that you see that, then they get
defensive and then you really got a problem.
Another participant described how the general condition of being homeless affects your mental
and physical health, increasing the deferment of the mission:
You can't stay as clean as you use to when you're homeless, you're stressed out, you don't
know exactly who you can turn to or where you can get your medicine, it's difficult when
you're homeless, I get depressed sometimes and then I procrastinate, you're out there, you
know and your mind could be on some other stuff, you really would like to take care of
the situation right then and there, but it's hard because you're trying to get yourself
together, get a job and everything, get housing, so it's more than one thing to think about.

!

133!
!

!
It’s not the same as being in a structured environment and when you're in a structured
environment, you got more assets that can help you.
One participant described a continuous cycle of attempting to maintain sobriety and hold down
employment but then falling back into addictive behaviors with negative results:
I gotta get my medicine and everything first, right now I'm can't go to work like this,
dizzy, lightheaded spells and then it got worse and actually last week it's gotten worse…I
do have a bad marijuana addiction because I got stressed out and I turn to drugs.
Additionally, there can be a lack of commitment and motivation to managing their health
problems which results in no active engagement in the healthcare system, no use of primary care
services, or any health services at all. Veterans who are deferring the mission often speak of
feeling depressed, hopeless, taken advantage of, and have low self-worth.
Some people took advantage of me because I suffer from mental illness. They took
advantage of me and took my money. They tried to swindle me, I lose in the end.
Homeless veterans may defer the management of their chronic health problems for multiple
reasons. All participants in this category were unable to begin consistent active engagement in
their healthcare. They described personal and logistical barriers that obstruct their ability to
manage their diagnosed chronic diseases and pursue positive health outcomes.
Exploring the Mission
Homeless veterans categorized as “exploring the mission” (n=12 participants) are defined
as those who are just beginning to discover and become aware of their health mission. These
participants describe initial attempts at active engagement in the healthcare system. Frequently,
these individuals are aware of their health problems and try to deal with them as best as they can
on a day-to-day basis. They are slowly taking the needed steps in order to successfully manage

!

134!
!

!
their chronic health problems while still facing significant barriers. One participant who recently
entered a substance abuse treatment facility for homeless veterans described his initial thoughts
about his health progress, and his plans for moving forward:
Right now, I'm taking everything day by day. My goal is to end the homelessness, stop
my alcoholism and to live a productive life.
Unfortunately, it can be difficult for these veterans to stay on a healthy track because they
are just beginning the mission. Many described experiencing turning points in their life where
they knew that they could not keep up with the unhealthy lifestyle they were living. A participant
described his feelings of loneliness and desperation and how that helped to turn his life around
and served as a motivator to seek treatment for alcohol abuse:
The desperation that I was in my last three year run, the desperation, the feeling of
hopeless that I was in, is a feeling that I never want to feel again. I don't want to feel that
no more, you know just a feeling that I felt. This last episode of homelessness was rough.
Participants who were “exploring the mission” also describe becoming more self-aware
in regards to their health. They are more aware of the need to take care of their health problems
and often attempt to seek care. One participant described realizing the need for management of
his health problems and how that influenced his ability to take control of his life:
While I was in the streets homeless, I was really concerned with myself, with my health
problems. I do have depression, so I would drink to deal with the depression…and I did
not worry about my health problems, my high blood pressure or anything, I would just
not worry about it, whatever happens, happens. Since I’ve been in rehab it has become a
concern. I’m not drinking anymore and I’ve been dealing with my depression. I am
concerned about my health now.

!

135!
!

!
Veterans who are exploring their health mission may not be actively engaged in primary care
services, but they are beginning to seek treatment for their health problems and gain a better
understanding of their health and the system.
Embarking on the Mission
Homeless veterans who are “embarking on the mission” (n=13 participants) of chronic
health management are defined as adapting and adjusting to the management of their chronic
health problems. They have made the decision to engage in the healthcare process and learn
about the steps needed to maintain their health such as navigating the healthcare system.
Typically, they have established primary care services; however, they may not always make
appointments or follow-up when appropriate. Additionally, these participants are learning to trust
the system, have more self-motivation in regards to their health, and are frequently future
oriented. One participant described they way he managed his medication schedule while being
homeless and moving often:
What I would do is get my medications for blood pressure, depression, and anxiety. I
would get a three-month supply of medications, so that would hold me over and when
that ran out, the VA would give me another three-month supply.
Other participants in this category described the importance of establishing a routine to
help manage their lives and health. They also recognized the interrelated nature of their health
and homeless status. When they are consistent with their medications and any special type of
treatment needed (i.e. wound care), then they are able to concentrate on finding housing and
food. However, if their health began to spiral out of control then they were less able to focus on
the basic necessities. One participant described what it is like to be homeless and dealing with
health issues even with access to health services and how quickly things can change:

!

136!
!

!
I miss a lot of doctor's appointments because I don't have a secretary. When you're
homeless you don't really have consistent situation, it's hard to organize your life, so
sometimes I do miss doctor's appointments, which is bad… I'm just trying to organize
things and sometimes you can have an appointment on such and such a day and then I
think where I live and what my appointment is and how problematic it's gonna be to get
there, so it might be easier where I'm at now but some day I might be living somewhere
else and I go all through this cycle so long, even if I'm in a place where I feel like I'm
secure, you always prepare for the worst.
Veterans who are embarking on the mission still constantly face barriers to health and housing,
but they are also optimistic about their future and tend to think about continuing to flourish in
their own personal lives and stay on a positive track. One participant described what it was like
living in the shelter system and constantly being exposed to illegal substances but that it was no
longer a problem for him:
I sit outside sometimes and them guys go back and forth, back and forth, smoking weed,
then heroin and drinking, but I don't do any of that, you know, I haven't for 6-1/2 years.
I'm proud of my clean time and I don't want to lose it, I just want to continue to grow.
Finally, these participants have a better understanding of their life situation. They know
what they need to do to manage their health and what routine works for them. One veteran was
able to vividly describe what he needed the most in order to manage his health problems:
Stability is one of the key building blocks of good health and stable health and if you
have joy and happiness in your life, health wise you have a tendency to be more healthy
than someone who is living on the street, worrying about somebody taking their stuff or
being killed on a 24-hour basis, and you sleep in your own bed, you are behind a secure

!

137!
!

!
area, and special people with PTSD tend to relax.
Those participants who are embarking on the mission of chronic disease management tend to
have a more positive outlook on their health and lives because of the constructive choices they
have made regarding their health. They are becoming more aware of their health needs and
actively contribute to the health process to meet those needs.
Embracing the Mission
Homeless veterans who are “embracing the mission” (n=5 participants) are defined as
those successfully managing their chronic health problems in their daily life. They are fully
committed to their health and have integrated their health needs into their normal routine. These
participants practice preventive behaviors, are more health literate, have taken full ownership of
their health situation, and are willing to commit to what is necessary to maintain their health.
They are also more health literate because they understand how to manage their diseases and
what signs and symptoms to be concerned about. One participant, who is HIV positive, described
his complicated medication routine as well as how he adapted to managing his medications while
being homeless:
Two of my anti-retroviral medications I have to take with food and if I'm not at a place
where food is available, in other words, I take it on a daily basis I just have to wait until
mealtime or go to a soup kitchen that is available that is accessible and take it after that, I
could never take it on an empty stomach because it's upsetting.
This participant understood the side effects of his medications and the importance of taking it
with food. He was able to adapt his health routine while being homeless and still manage his
HIV. Participants that embrace the mission continue to face barriers as all homeless veterans do.
However, they are able to see past those barriers understand the whole picture of their health.

!

138!
!

!
One participant had recent back surgery and was staying at a shelter. He ambulated with the
assistance of a walker. He described the circumstances he faced just to get to an appointment
from the shelter:
Well it was hard, trying to get back and forth to the hospital, you leave here at 7:30am,
they don't pick you up until 3:30 or 4:00pm, so you got the whole day up there…then I
had to go to UC, so I had to walk from the VA to UC, see the doctor over there and then
walk back to the VA to catch the ride…that was a hard day that day because I walked and
I could barely walk anyway, but I made it and just dealt with it.
These participants remain committed to their health and tend to stay positive and hopeful rather
than focusing on the negative aspects. One participant with significant chronic health problems
described how he maintains a healthy outlook on life despite being homeless:
Don't let the situation get you down, if you start letting stress and that get to you that's
gonna cause you more problems and you just take it a day at a time and whatever is
bothering you, do the best you can with it and if this is going on, maybe they can do
something else, but the more you try to help yourself, the better off you're gonna be.
By “embracing the mission,” these homeless veterans have moved on from blaming others for
their situation, have taken full ownership of their health problems, and frequently described
experiences of hope and joy in their lives.
Additional Findings
An additional and unique finding from this study is that the sample of participants were
from the Vietnam/post-Vietnam era. This characteristic was not part of the inclusion criteria, but
merely a result of the target population from which recruitment took place at the three sites. The
Vietnam/post-Vietnam War era was socially and contextually different than any later military

!

139!
!

!
war era (i.e. Gulf War, Iraq/Afghanistan) and therefore may have played a significant role in the
defining factors of each individual participants’ homelessness status.
Discussion
Outcomes from this study indicate that there are four ways in which Vietnam/postVietnam veterans who are homeless manage their chronic health problems. These four ways (i.e.
deferring, exploring, embarking, and embracing) provide researchers, healthcare providers, and
stakeholders with new knowledge that can be used to produce more effective interventions to
treat the many chronic health problems that homeless veterans endure. Previously published
literature is often lacking in theory based interventions that can result in patient-centered
outcomes. Instead, focus is placed on identifying medically-based interventions that will affect
homeless veterans as a group (Gabrielian et al., 2013; O’Toole et al., 2010; O’Toole et al., 2013).
This stance utilizes a broad “one size fits all” approach and does not consider that members of
this vulnerable population may manage their health in different ways. Narratives describing
experiences of deferring the mission were very different than narratives of veterans who
described embracing the management of chronic health problems. Not all veterans who are
homeless are able to embrace the mission of managing their chronic health problems and may
not be ready to actively engage in the healthcare process. These findings provide insight into an
individualistic and patient-centered approach to treatment for homeless veterans. This in turn
may increase their trust in the health system and provide opportunities for improved health
engagement.
The sample of homeless veterans in this study have a high rate (n=27, 84%) of being
diagnosed with more than one chronic health problem. This is consistent with an array of studies
that indicate veterans have multiple co-morbidities, a complex pattern of health, and a higher

!

140!
!

!
age-adjusted mortality rate (Adams, Rosenheck, Gee, Seibyl, & Kushel, 2007; Goldstein et al.,
2008; Goldstein et al., 2010; Tsai et al., 2012). In the United States the cost burden of chronic
disease is 78% of total health spending (Bodenheimer, Chen, & Bennett, 2009). This number is
expected to increase over the next ten years due to the aging population and a rise in modifiable
risk factors such as obesity. Additionally, there is a stronger correlation seen between those who
fall below the federal poverty level and chronic disease compared to the general population
(Bodenheimer et al., 2009). All of these factors result in an increased burden and financial strain
on the U.S. healthcare system. Therefore, it is likely that veterans who are homeless and
suffering from chronic disease are at a higher risk of developing more chronic illnesses as they
age, thus requiring more healthcare services. The sample drawn from this study indicates high
rates of chronic disease among an aging population which is consistent with the formerly
discussed findings. The homeless veterans in this study were all from the Vietnam/post-Vietnam
era and more likely to continue to develop chronic illnesses.
Moreover, findings from this study contribute to the extensive literature found on barriers
related to healthcare that homeless veterans face (Blue-Howells et al., 2008; Goldstein et al.,
2010). Study participants frequently identified transportation issues and service fragmentation in
the healthcare system as major concerns. Although, as depicted in the study findings, those
obstacles can play a major or a minor role in a veterans’ life, depending on the way homeless
veterans manage their health problems. Barriers were discussed by participants who managed
each of the four ways, but were often more prevalent in the deferring and exploring category.
Those participants embarking upon and embracing management of their chronic health problems
often took ownership of their health problems and did not provide justifications for not seeking
health services or missed appointments. Additionally, those participants who accessed the VA

!

141!
!

!
healthcare system (n=24, 75%) often described more health and social-related resources to help
better manage their chronic diseases and obtain permanent housing.
Limitations
A limitation of this study was self-disclosed veteran status. Participants were not asked to
provided official identification or documentation of military status. However, due to the specific
nature of the topic and the initial demographic information collected, it would be challenging for
an individual to falsify any claims related to military enrollment and experience. Another
limitation of this study is that participants were interviewed at one point in time. Homeless
populations are historically nomadic and often cycle in and out of homelessness as evidenced by
the multiple episodes described by the study sample. This study was able to only capture a single
snapshot of the described experiences of homeless veterans living with a chronic health problem.
Conclusions
Chronic disease management among the homeless Vietnam/post-Vietnam veteran
population is a complex phenomenon that was captured in this study with the central concept of
pursuing the mission. In order for chronic disease-based interventions with homeless veterans to
be most effective, they should focus on the four specific ways that they attempt to manage their
health rather than one general approach. All participants in this study were able to describe in
their interview one of the four different ways that they utilize to manage their health. This study
helped to gain a better understanding of the health needs of a population that has honorably
worked to serve and protect their country. Finally, study findings are able to confirm the need for
continued work to improve the health and quality of life among this vulnerable population and
ultimately contribute to the goal of ending veteran homelessness.

!

142!
!

!
References
Adams, J., Rosenheck, R., Gee, L., Seibyl, C.L. & Kushel, M. (2007). Hospitalized younger: A
comparison of a national sample of homeless and housed inpatient veterans. Journal of
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 18, 173-184.
Blue-Howells, J., McGuire, J. & Nakashima, J. (2008). Co-location of health care services for
homeless veterans: A case study of innovation program implementation. Social Work in
Health Care, 47(3), 219-231.
Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism. Perspective and method. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Bodenheimer, T., Chen, E., & Bennett, H.D. (2009). Confronting the growing burden of chronic
disease: Can the US health care workforce do the job? Health Affairs, 28(1), 64-74.
Department of Defense. (2016). Department of defense dictionary of military and associated
terms. Retrieved from: https://fas.org/irp/doddir/dod/jp1_02.pdf
Denzin, N.K. & Lincoln, Y.S. (2011). The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fargo, J., Metraux, S., Byrne, T., Munley, E., Montgomery, A.E., Jones, H.,…Culhane, D.
(2012). Prevalence and risk of homelessness among US veterans. Preventing Chronic
Disease, 9.
Gabrielian, S., Yuan, A., Andersen, R.M., McGuire, J., Rubenstein, L., Sapir, N. & Gelberg, L.
(2013). Chronic disease management for recently homeless veterans: A clinical practice
improvement program to apply home telehealth technology to a vulnerable population.
Medical Care, 51(3), S44-S51.
Gilliss, C.L. (2010). Making a difference in the health care of veterans: 9 things you should

!

143!
!

!
know. Nursing Outlook, 58, 276-278.
Glaser, B.G. (1978). Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the Methodology of Grounded Theory.
Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B.G. & Strauss, A.L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative
research. London, UK: Aldine Transactions.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Haas, G.L., Appelt, C.J. & Gordon, A.J. (2010). Factor structure and
risk factors for the health status of homeless veterans. Psychiatric Quarterly, 81, 311323.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Jacoby, A.M. & Haas, G.L. (2008). A taxonomy of medical
comorbidity for veterans who are homeless. The Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
Underserved, 19(3), 991-1005.
Kushel, M.B., Vittinghoff, E. & Haas, J.S. (2001). Factors associated with the health care
utilization of homeless persons. Journal of the American Medical Association, 285(2),
200-206.
MAXQDA. (2015). The art of data analysis. Version 12. Berlin, Germany.
Nyamathi, A., Sands, H., Pattatucci-Aragon, A., Berg, J., Leake, B., Hahn, J.E. & Morisky, D.
(2003). Perception of health status by homeless US veterans. Family Community Health,
27(1), 65-74.
O’Toole, T.P., Bourgault, C., Johnson, E.E., Redihan, S.G., Borgia, M., Aiello, R. & Kane, V.
(2013). New to care: Demands on a health system when homeless veterans are enrolled in
a medical model home. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S374-S379.
O’Toole, T.P., Buckel, L., Bourgault, C., Blumen, J., Redihan, S.G., Jiang, L., & Friedmann, P.
(2010). Applying the chronic care model to homeless veterans: Effect of a population

!

144!
!

!
approach to primary care on utilization and clinical outcomes. American Journal of
Public Health, 100(12), 2493-2499.
Schanzer, B., Dominguez, B., Shrout, P.E. & Canton, C.L.M. (2007). Homelessness, health
status, and health care use. American Journal of Public Health, 97(3), 464-469.
Tsai, J., Mares, A.S. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2012). Do homeless veterans have the same needs and
outcomes as non-veterans? Military Medicine, 177(1), 27-31).
Tsai, J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2014). Uninsured veterans who will need to obtain insurance
coverage under the patient protection and affordable care act. American Journal of Public
Health, 104(3), e57-e62.
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. (2015). The 2015 annual
homeless assessment report (AHAR) to congress. Retrieved from:
https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/2015-AHAR-Part-1.pdf
United States Interagency Council on Homelessness. (2010). Opening doors: Federal strategic
plan to prevent and end homelessness. Retrieved from:
https://www.usich.gov/resources/uploads/asset_library/ExpertsBriefs_All5Workgroups.pdf

!

145!
!

!

Emergency Department Utilization Among a
Sample of Male Homeless Veterans
Jillian J. Weber RN, MSN, CNL
Member, Greater Cincinnati Emergency Nurses Chapter
PhD Candidate
University of Cincinnati
College of Nursing
Acknowledgements
This research study was supported by a VA VISN 10 Research Initiative Program Grant

!

146!
!

!
Abstract
Introduction: Homeless populations are historically high utilizers of the emergency department
(ED) for low acuity issues that could be treated in more appropriate settings such as primary
care. Veterans make up 11% of the homeless adult population and are often seen in community
and Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) EDs. The purpose of this research study was to
make recommendations to emergency nurses about the care of homeless veterans through the indepth exploration of data from a larger qualitative study.
Methods: Grounded theory methodology provided the overarching framework for this research
project. Structured interviews were conducted with 34 male homeless veterans with 25 referring
to emergency department care. Veterans were recruited and interviewed from one VAMC ED, an
all-male emergency shelter, and one soup kitchen. Text units about ED usage were extracted and
compared from 25 recorded transcripts to identify categories.
Results: Three categories defining ED experiences among a sample of male homeless veterans
was revealed from constant comparison of the resulting data. The three categories include:
“dealing with it”, “having a voice”, and “valuing others”.
Discussion: The sample of homeless veterans in this study provided valuable first-person
knowledge about their experiences receiving care in EDs. These results are consistent with
previous research indicating that homeless populations are high utilizers of ED care; however,
they often feel undervalued and lack of empathy from health providers. Emergency nurses are an
important part of the ED healthcare delivery system for the homeless providing advocacy and
much needed education about health problems and alternatives to ED care.
Key words: Homelessness, veterans, emergency nursing, high ED utilizers, health education

!

147!
!

!
Homelessness is a common characteristics found among individuals accessing the
emergency department (ED) for care (Mendelberg, Kuhn & Kohn, 2000) comprising over one
million visits out of 136 million to the ED every year (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 2011). This places a significant economic, time, and space burden on EDs
and the overall healthcare delivery system (Chambers et al., 2013; DiPietro, Kindermann &
Schenkel, 2012; Kushel, Perry, Bangsberg, Clark & Moss, 2002). Often, those who frequently
use the ED represent a small sample of the ED population but make up a large number of visits.
These individuals use EDs as their primary source of care due to its ease and accessibility
(Chambers et al., 2013; Chwastiak, Tsai, & Rosenheck, 2012; DiPietro, Kindermann &
Schenkel, 2012).
A general definition of homelessness includes those who are sleeping outside and those
who reside in homeless assistance programs such as emergency shelters or other temporary
accommodations (National Alliance to End Homelessness, 2015). The homeless are at an
increased risk for high emergency department usage because of their overall poor health status
including high levels of chronic disease and morbidity (Schanzer, Dominguez, Shrout, & Caton,
2007), increased exposure to natural elements, high rates of injuries, and unmet health needs
(Bagett et al., 2010). Homeless veterans are a noteworthy subpopulation of those who are
homeless, representing 11% of the adult homeless population (HUD, 2015). The argument can
be made that veterans have access to more health-related resources than other homeless
subpopulations (Tessler, Rosenheck, & Gamache, 2002) due to their access to the Veterans
Health Administration (VHA). However, only 40% of the nation’s 22 million veterans are
registered for VHA benefits (National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics 2014) and
often choose not to access the Veterans Affairs (VA) system (Agha, Lofgren, VanRuiswyk, &

!

148!
!

!
Layde, 2000; Goldstein et al., 2008; Goldstein et al., 2010). Instead they often opt to receive care
in the community setting. Various studies (Doran, Raven, & Rosenheck, 2013; Hastings et al.,
2011; Tsai & Rosenheck, 2013) indicate that frequent ED usage by homeless veterans remains a
significant problem both within the VA system and in community settings.
Common characteristics and patterns of utilization of VA emergency departments among
veterans has been previously examined (Doran et al., 2013; Hastings et al., 2011; Tsai &
Rosenheck, 2013). The strongest sociodemographic correlation of VA ED use was found to be
homelessness, with homeless veterans being more than six times likely to be amongst the most
frequent ED users (Doran et al., 2013). Additionally, homelessness has been shown to be ten
times higher in veterans who are treated and released from EDs and is a predictor of repeat visits
and hospitalizations (Hastings et al., 2011). Homeless VA ED users are also more likely to use
the ED repeatedly for non-emergent services and at higher rates than their housed veteran
counterparts (Tsai & Rosenheck, 2013). The general characteristics of homelessness increases
the likelihood of an individual using an ED for health care, rather than some other source (i.e.
ambulatory care, primary care). In addition to creating an overcrowded and financially burdened
environment, this high utilization of EDs by veterans who are homeless leads to a lack in
continuity of care and puts all ED users at risk. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to make
recommendations and to educate emergency nurses and other stakeholders about effective
approaches to delivering patient-centered care to homeless veterans in the ED.
Methods
Study Design
This study was designed to meet one specific aim from a larger qualitative grounded
theory study (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) in which the overall purpose was to explore how homeless

!

149!
!

!
veterans manage their chronic health problems. The specific aim addressed in this article was to
explore the role of the emergency department in how veterans manage these health problems.
Institutional review board and VA Research and Development Committee approval was obtained
prior to any study activities taking place. Semi-structured interviews were audio-recorded and
used along with field notes and memos to collect rich data. Each participant received a $35 gift
card to a large chain grocery store for compensation for their time.
Sample & Setting
Male homeless veterans were recruited from three locations across one large, urban
Midwestern city. Detailed flyers and on site recruitment occurred at one VA emergency
department, a soup kitchen, and a large all-male emergency shelter. The transcripts of 34
participants in the larger study were analyzed for text units pertaining to ED visits in this study.
Text units are defined as sentences, phrases, or stories (Draucker & Martsolf, 2010) about
homeless male veterans’ experiences in the ED. Twenty-five participants from the larger study
discussed care in the ED. The average age was 56 years old and 17 participants identified as
African American while the remaining 8 identified as Caucasian. Over 80% of the study
population had more than one diagnosed chronic health problem with substance abuse (drugs and
/or alcohol) being the most common. Emergency department utilization of the study sample is
depicted in Table 1.
VA ED only

13 participants

Community ED only

8 participants

Both VA & Community ED

4 participants

Table 1: Emergency department usage of homeless veteran sample
Data Analysis Procedures

!

150!
!

!
Interviews with participants were audio-recorded, transcribed, and verified by the
principal investigator. Participants were asked to describe a time when they needed to seek
treatment for their chronic health problems and to provide any advice or recommendations to
health care providers working with homeless veterans with chronic health problems in the larger
study. Emergency department usage was discussed in 54 text units. The grounded theory
technique of constant comparative analysis was used to analyze the resulting text units. To
ensure rigor of the study a research team worked together to analyze the data and reach
consensus.
Results
Three categories were identified during the data analysis process that describe homeless
veterans’ experiences when receiving care in an emergency department and their advice for
healthcare providers. The categories include: “no other option”, “having a voice”, and “valuing
others”.
No other option
Participants described feeling as though they have no place else to go except the
emergency department to be treated for their symptoms. For example, one participant described
being treated in the ED for diabetes:
I been to the emergency room, in the last two months I’ve been five times. They’re sick
of looking at me, you know what I mean. My sugar was 688, they brought it down to 305
and put me out. I went back, my sugar was 650. The brought it down to 300 and put me
out.
Participants tended to not think about the future but only remained concerned about being treated
for their health problems at the current time because they felt that the future is beyond their

!

151!
!

!
control. They did not have the energy or whereabouts to think about receiving follow-up care or
making follow-up appointments. One participant described his typical treatment for his health
problems:
I just go to the emergency room and they give me whatever medication I need and then
when I start to feeling better I leave it alone until another episode. Follow-up after that,
me not being stable, I don’t even think about that.
Participants described attempting to deal with the problems the best they can because they have
no other option. They were often hopeful that they would remain healthy and not need any health
services as one participant openly described:
As far as my health, I just try to take care of myself the best I can, you know there is
nothing I can do, you know but deal with the situation…I can’t make myself better so I
usually go to the emergency room doctor.
Participants used the ED when needed but were concerned about payment and even
transportation issues. They described just trying to “deal” with the pain or health problem they
face and not seek any treatment until the problem becomes unbearable and they have nowhere
else to go. Additionally, they often lack the knowledge of how to obtain other available resources
and the time needed to access those resources that can be used to better manage their care. For
example, one veteran participant described how he uses the ED for his chronic back pain rather
than seeking treatment from a primary care provider:
Well if my back is hurting too bad, I go to the emergency room. Basically that's what
I've been doing and then I after I get the medication I just wait until that episode is over
with and then I won't worry about it until it happens again or I do something to agitate it
and then I'm running back to the emergency room.

!

152!
!

!
Having a voice
The veteran participants described experiences where they were often discounted in the
healthcare system. They wanted to be heard and have a say in their healthcare and social
situation as one participant explained after visiting the ED:
I just would like to be heard sometimes, I don’t like to be talked at, I definitely do not
like to be talked down to, but I would just like to be heard…if the provider or care source
would just maybe listen, he would just know how to treat the person that they’re
providing service for. We don’t need a lot. We may need a little patience but we don’t
need a lot.
Often participants described situations that could have been more easily resolved had their
healthcare provider listened to them and tried to better understand their needs and life situation.
For instance, one participant explained how his needs may be different from another individual
in ED who is also experiencing homelessness:
I think healthcare providers really need to listen to our problems more and really listen
and just take each individual case different, we all are different some people need help
with certain things, others need help with other things.
Homeless veterans vividly described experiences of feeling disposable to not only healthcare
providers and social service providers but by the general public. One veteran described how he
feels when attempting to interact with emergency department staff and healthcare personnel:
Because of my homelessness, I don’t think they really take us as being very important
people.

!

153!
!

!
Participants’ negative health-related experiences often prevented them from reaching out for help
and promoted lack of trust between the homeless and their providers. A participant described not
wanting to return for healthcare services because of his negative ED experience:
The doctor was rude. He came in and told me I had a year, he said you’ll be dead in a
year if you don’t change your ways.
Valuing others
Regardless of experiencing both positive and negative situations in the ED and other
health-related settings, many participants were quick to praise those who truly try to help
homeless veterans. Participants provided encouraging stories where they either experienced or
witnessed others helping homeless individuals:
All these people go beyond their job. I see one case worker, she takes a guy across the
railroad to pick up stuff that he needs and the case workers are taking people to their new
place.
Much emphasis was placed on feeling that individuals were genuine in their willingness to help
and greatly appreciated when there was someone prepared to advocate for them. A veteran with
suicidal ideations described how important it was that the emergency department psychiatric
staff stepped in to help him:
I went to the emergency room and told them that I had had it, I was ready to kill myself.
Right then the psychiatric emergency department jumped in and they kept me in the
hospital for awhile until I felt I was all right. They asked me if I'm ready to go home yet,
and I wasn't feeling it, I wasn't ready to go home, so I didn't go home.
Discussion

!

154!
!

!
The findings from this research study indicate that emergency department utilization is
often the last option for male homeless veterans. When participants were asked about a time they
needed to seek treatment for their chronic health problems they often described an experience
involving ED care. This is significant, and provides some explanation for why homeless veterans
are high utilizers of EDs (Doran, Raven, & Rosenheck, 2013; Hastings et al., 2011; Tsai &
Rosenheck, 2013). Furthermore, the findings suggest that homeless veterans lack the knowledge
and the time required to access other healthcare resources, such as primary or ambulatory care
services, that are often cheaper and more effective at treating chronic issues.
Individuals who are homeless need to be thoroughly educated about healthcare services
that are available to them, about the process of accessing healthcare, and about what is
appropriate for the ED. This finding is supported by previous literature that reports the extensive
need for more education and comprehensive discharge planning for this vulnerable population
(Chambers et al., 2013; DiPietro et al., 2012; Ku et al., 2010). However, because of their housing
and often food instability, homeless veterans often described using the ED because they had no
other option. They are focused on finding food, shelter, and safety (McCormack & MacIntosh,
2001) rather than seeking appropriate healthcare services. The ED serves as their safety net and
veterans described their attempts to deal with their health issues until they symptoms became
unavoidable. As a result, they sought out ED care for various reasons such as treatment for
diabetes, medication refills, or a nebulizer treatment for their chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease exacerbation.
Recommendations for providing care to this unique population include first conducting a
brief medical and social history from the veteran and discuss with them what their needs and
expectations are from their ED visit. Not all homeless veterans who seek out ED care want help

!

155!
!

!
with social issues. They may choose to continue with their current transient lifestyle. Therefore,
it is important for emergency nurses to know upfront what the veteran expects from the visit so a
plan for ED care can be initiated. Whether a homeless veteran is admitted to the hospital or
discharged from the ED, valuable information is available to assist with their needs. The
Department of Veterans Affairs provides a list of useful resources for homeless veterans that can
be accessed via the internet (VA, 2016a). Included are national outreach materials such as a
telephone hotline number to get immediate aid for a homeless veteran, aid available specifically
for women veterans, housing and employment assistance programs, and numerous other national
and local resources. Additionally, it is important to collaborate with social services and local
VAs who may have access to more available resources and can support emergency nurses in
their efforts.
Participants describe both positive and negative experiences when encountering
emergency health services in both the VA and the community setting. Marginalization of
vulnerable populations is not a new concept and homeless participants in this study describe how
they often felt disposable and wanted to have a voice in the matter of their health. Veterans who
are homeless often have more complex healthcare needs (Chambers et al., 2013; Ku, Scott,
Kertesz, & Pitts, 2010) than the general population. Additionally, they are often a nomadic
population and may seek health services across multiple states and healthcare networks.
Therefore, healthcare providers must seek to gain a full understanding of their health and social
situation. During their military service veterans may have been exposed to chemicals, noises,
animal bites, and other traumatic occurrences that can cause health concerns (VA, 2016b). It is
important for providers to be vigilant when providing services to our nations heroes and allow
them the appropriate time and space to adequately explain their healthcare needs.

!

156!
!

!
Limitations
A limitation of this study was that participants were interviewed at one point in time and
may not adequately represent homeless veterans seeking treatment at other VA and non-VA EDs
across the United States. However, since participants reported being treated at both VA and nonVA settings, and there are veterans who are homeless widespread across the US, it can be
inferred that results are easily transferrable to other urban settings. Another limitation of this
study was that the resulting sample was of an older age (mean=57 years old) which may
contribute to their need to seek care in the ED more often than younger homeless veterans due to
having more health problems. A final limitation of this study was that the veteran status of
participants was self-disclosed. Participants were not asked to provide written proof of military
service. Although, due to the nature of the questions asked during the interview process it would
be challenging for a participant to falsify military information and described experiences.
Implications for Emergency Nurses
Emergency nurses are likely to encounter homeless populations, including veterans,
because of their frequent visits to EDs across the United States (CDC, 2011). They are in a
unique position to provide healthcare, much needed health education, and advocate for this
vulnerable population. Results from this study indicate how vital experiences in the ED can be to
a homeless veterans’ overall quality of life. To ensure that patient-centered care is provided to
homeless veterans, emergency nurses should assist with their physical, mental, and social
problems, actively listen to their complaints, value them as individuals, and offer their support as
a dynamic member of the healthcare team. It may be necessary for emergency nurses to take
additional steps to support homeless veterans such as making phone calls and helping them to set

!

157!
!

!
up appointments for follow-up care since health is often a secondary factor in their chaotic
lifestyle.
The ED can be a volatile environment where emergency nurses and other healthcare
providers need to make quick, educated decisions in order to deliver the best care to often the
sickest patients. Providing patient-centered care to the homeless, who often come to the ED for
lower acuity health problems, is often not the top priority compared to a gunshot wound or acute
stoke. Yet, a slight shift in the ED culture could make the difference in the lives of homeless
individuals and everyone attempting to receive care in the ED. Higher acuity patients will always
take priority, however, taking a few extra minutes to meet a homeless veteran’ needs could make
the difference in having an overcrowded, potentially unsafe ED an environment where wait times
are short and all patients receive optimal care.
Veterans themselves have unique physical and mental health needs due to their service in
the military to which emergency nurses should be alert. They are often exposed to hazardous
materials such as chemicals, cold injuries, and contaminated water and experience mental health
issues such as post-traumatic stress disorder, substance abuse, and depression because of their
exposure to combat and other atrocities (VA, 2016b). Emergency nurses must take the time to
ask pertinent health questions related to a homeless veterans’ military experience. A VA (2015)
developed tool is available to assist nurses and other clinicians in obtaining valuable military and
health history information from veterans in order to best provide for their unique healthcare
needs. This includes asking about military era served, if the veteran experienced combat, talking
with the veteran about stress, anxiety, depression, and other mental health issues, and discussing
their housing situation (VA, 2015).

!

158!
!

!
From previous literature (Chambers et al., 2013; Ku, Scott, Kertesz, & Pitts, 2010) and
results of this study, we know that the homeless need a better understanding of their health
problems, more knowledge about appropriate health resources (Parker & Dykema, 2013), and
need to be given the opportunity to be better understood. Thus, emergency nurses should seek to
provide more comprehensive health education and discharge planning to their homeless patients
in order to reduce overcrowding of emergency departments, increase patient safety, and lessen
the economic burden on the healthcare delivery system. Finally, by giving a voice to those
homeless individuals who may have been previously ignored, emergency nurses create positive
health interactions that ultimately lead to positive patient-centered outcomes.
Conclusions
It is imperative for emergency nurses to have a clear understanding of the health and
social needs of homeless individuals in order to prevent ED overcrowding, reduce repeat visits,
and help improve patient safety. This study provided a unique patient-centered perspective of
what homeless veterans experience when seeking care in the emergency department. When
healthcare providers, particularly nurses, give the homeless the opportunity to express
themselves, a more trusting relationship unfolds that creates an environment for positive patient
outcomes through advocacy and education. However, future research with more innovative
approaches are still needed to gain a better understanding of methods to reduce unwarranted,
high emergency department usage among homeless veterans and all homeless populations.

!

159!
!

!
References
Agha, Z., Lofgren, R.P., VanRuiswyk, J.V. & Layde, P.M. (2000). Are patients at veterans
affairs medical center sicker. Archives of Internal Medicine, 160, 3252-3257.
Baggett, T.P., O’Connell, J.J., Singer, D.E. & Rigotti, N.A. (2010). The unmet health care needs
of homeless adults: a national study. American Journal of Public Health, 100(7), 13261333.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). National hospital ambulatory care survey:
2011 emergency department summary tables. Retrieved from:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/nhamcs_emergency/2011_ed_web_tables.pdf
Chambers, C., Chiu, S., Katic, M., Kiss, A., Redelmeier, D.A., Levinson, W. & Hwang, S.W.
(2013). High utilitzers of emergency health services in a population-based cohort of
homeless adults. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), 302-310.
Chwastiak, L, Tsai, J. & Rosenheck, R. (2012). Impact of health insurance status and a diagnosis
of serious mental illness on whether chronically homeless individuals engage in primary
care. American Journal of Public Health, 102(12), 83-89.
DiPietro, B.Y., Kindermann, D. & Schenkel, S.M. (2012). Ill, itinerant and insured: the top 20
users of the emergency departments in Baltimore city. The Scientific World Journal,
2012.
Draucker, C. & Martsolf, D. (2010). Life-course typology of adults who experienced sexual
violence. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 25(7), 1155-1182.
Doran, K.M., Raven, M.C. & Rosenheck R.A. (2013). What drives frequent emergency
department use in an integrated health system? National data from the veterans health
administration. Annuals of Emergency Medicine, 62(2), 151-159.

!

160!
!

!
Glaser, B.G. & Strauss, A.L. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Chicago: Aldine.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Haas, G.L., Appelt, C.J. & Gordon, A.J. (2010). Factor structure and
risk factors for the health status of homeless veterans. Psychiatric Quarterly, 81, 311323.
Goldstein, G., Luther, J.F., Jacoby, A.M. & Haas, G.L. (2008). A taxonomy of medical
comorbidity for veterans who are homeless. The Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
Underserved, 19(3), 991-1005.
Hastings, S.N., Smith, V.A., Weinberger, M., Schmader, K.E., Olsen, M.K. & Oddone, E.Z.
(2011). Emergency department visits in veteran’s affairs medical facilities. The American
Journal of Managed Care, 17(6), 215-223.
Ku, B.S., Scott, K.C., Kertesz, S.G. & Pitts, S.R. (2010). Factors associated with use of urban
emergency departments by the US homeless population. Public Health Reports, 125,
398-405.
Kushel, M.B., Perry, S., Bangsberg, D., Clark, R. & Moss, A.R. (2002). Emergency department
use among the homeless and marginally housed: results from a community based study.
American Journal of Public Health, 92(5), 778-784.
Kushel, M.B., Vittinghoff, E. & Haas, J.S. (2001). Factors associated with the health care
utilization of homeless persons. Journal of the American Medical Association, 285(2),
200-206.
Mandelberg, J.H., Kuhn, R.E. & Kohn, M.A. (2000). Epidemiologic analysis of an urban, public
emergency department’s frequent users. Academic Emergency Medicine, 7, 637-646.
MAXQDA. (2015). The art of data analysis. Version 12. Berlin, Germany.

!

161!
!

!
McCormack, D. & MacIntosh, J. (2001). Research with homeless people uncovers a model of
health. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 23, 679-697.
National Alliance to End Homelessness. (2015). The state of homelessness in America.
Retrieved from: http://www.endhomelessness.org/page//files/State_of_Homelessness_2015_FINAL_online.pdf
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics. (2014). Department of veterans affairs
statistics at a glance. Retrieved from: http://www.va.gov/vetdata/index.asp
Parker, R.D. & Dykema, S. (2013). The reality of homeless mobility and implications for
improving care. Journal of Community Health, 38, 685-689.
Schanzer, B., Dominguez, B., Shrout, P.E. & Canton, C.L.M. (2007). Homelessness, health
status, and health care use. American Journal of Public Health, 97(3), 464-469.
Tessler, R., Rosenheck, R. & Gamache, G. (2002). Comparison of homeless veterans with other
homeless men in a large clinical outreach program. Psychiatric Quarterly, 73(2), 109119.
Tsai, J. & Rosenheck, R.A. (2013). Risk factors for ED use among homeless veterans. American
Journal of Emergency Medicine, 31, 855-858.
United States Department of Veterans Affairs. (2015). Military health history pocket card for
clinicians. Retrieved from: http://www.va.gov/oaa/archive/Military-Health-History-Cardfor-print.pdf
United States Department of Veterans Affairs. (2016a). Ending veteran homelessness.
Retrieved from: http://www.va.gov/homeless/index.asp
United States Department of Veterans Affairs. (2016b). Public health: Military exposures.
Retrieved from: http://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/index.asp

!

162!
!

!
Appendix A

A"Grounded"Theory"Study"of"How"Homeless"Veterans"Manage"Their"
Chronic"Health"Problems"
Demographic"Sheet"
1)# Age:#____________________________________________________________#
#
2)# Race/Ethnicity:____________________________________________________#
#
3)# Number#of#years#served#in#military:#____________________________________#
#
4)# Military#era(s)#served:#______________________________________________#
#
5)# Length#of#homelessness:____________________________________________#
#
6)# Number#of#episodes#of#homelessness:__________________________________#
#
7)# Primary#place#for#sleeping#at#night:#____________________________________#
#
8)# Diagnosed#chronic#health#care#problem(s):______________________________#
#
________________________________________________________________#
#
9)# Regular#use#of#health#care#service#(please#circle#response):#
Yes##########################No#
10)#If#regular#use#of#health#care#service,#where#do#you#go#for#care:#
#
#
#
VA#hospital##
#

VA#emergency#department##

#

VA#clinic#

#

Community#hospital#

#

Community#emergency#department#

#

Community#clinic#

#

!

163!
!

!
Appendix!B!
!
Homeless!Veterans!Interview!Guide!
!
You!have!indicated!that!you!have!had!a!health!problem!for!a!long!time!without!having!a!
stable!home.!I!am!interested!in!understanding!how!you!manage!this!in!your!life?!
!
Tell!me!about!your!experiences!as!a!person!with!unstable!housing!
!
Tell!me!about!your!experiences!with!your!longQterm!health!problem(s)!
!
Can!you!tell!me!what!a!typical!day!is!like!for!you!
!
Tell!me!about!a!time!when!you!needed!to!seek!treatment!for!your!chronic!health!problem.!
!
How!do!you!manage!your!chronic!health!problem(s)!while!also!dealing!with!the!daily!living!
circumstances!of!having!no!permanent!residence.!!!
!
Tell!me!about!your!experiences,!if!any,!with!the!VA!system.!
!
Tell!me!about!your!experiences!with!community!social!service!resources!
!
Tell!me!about!your!experiences!with!community!medical!resources!
!
What!advice!would!you!give!to!other!homeless!veterans!to!manage!their!health!!
!
What!advice!would!you!give!to!health!care!and!social!service!professionals!working!with!
homeless!veterans!with!a!chronic!health!problem.!!
!
!

!

164!
!

!
Appendix C
Knowledge!Experts!Interview!Guide!
!
You!have!indicated!that!you!work!with!homeless!veterans,!can!you!tell!me!about!your!
experiences!working!with!these!veterans!who!also!have!diagnosed!chronic!health!
problems.!
!
Can!you!please!share!any!specific!incidences!(without!giving!away!any!identifying!
information)!that!you!recall!in!dealing!with!a!homeless!veteran!attempting!to!manage!their!
chronic!health!problem.!
!
What!some!facilitators!for!homeless!veterans!and!what!are!some!barriers!(community,!VA).!
!
Are!there!any!current!practices!that!you!would!like!to!change!when!dealing!with!homeless!
veterans!who!have!chronic!health!problems.!
!
What!recommendations!would!you!make!to!any!social!service!provider!or!health!care!
professional!working!with!homeless!veterans!who!have!a!chronic!disease.!!
!
What!recommendations!would!you!make!to!homeless!veterans!to!best!manage!their!health!
problems.!!
!

!

165!
!

