Availability of Food and Nutrition
Education at Greater Cincinnati Food
Pantries

A thesis submitted to the
Graduate School
of the University of Cincinnati
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Master of Science
in the Department of Nutritional Sciences
by
Adam Barone
B.S. Indiana University, 2013
July, 2016

Committee Chair: Seung-Yeon Lee, PhD

ABSTRACT
Objectives: To explore the availability of food and nutrition education at food
pantries and assess the perceived barriers and needs to offer nutrition education
to pantry clients.
Methods: Food pantry coordinators (N=41) in an urban area completed a survey
and an in-depth interview. The coordinators (mean age = 63.4 ± 9.1 years) were
mostly non-Hispanic white (73%), female (73%) and well educated (at least a
bachelor’s degree, 61%). Surveys collected demographic and food availability
information while in-depth interviews focused on assessing the perceived barriers
and resources needed to offer nutrition education on site. Survey data was
analyzed using SPSS and interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed
with NVivo following content analysis.
Results: Seventy-five percent of food pantries offered choice distribution where
clients selected items. Fresh produce and foods that were reduced fat, lowsodium, or whole grain/multi-grain were not as available as the less healthy
counterparts. Few pantries (29%) offered nutrition education for clients. Needs
identified to provide nutrition education were personnel with nutrition expertise,
nutrition information, and space. Barriers to promoting healthy eating were limited
availability of healthy foods and perceived limits in client nutrition knowledge and
interest in nutrition education.
Conclusions and Implications: Fresh food options or foods with reduced
sodium or fat or whole grains, had lower availability at pantries. Few pantries
offered nutrition education to clients. Improving the storage capacity of food
pantries and effective strategies to acquire donations are key to making healthy
items more available. Collaborative efforts among food pantry coordinators,
community partners, and nutrition experts may help improve the availability of
healthy foods and nutrition education at local food pantries.
Key Words: food pantry, nutrition education, food availability, food insecurity

ii

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ABSTRACT ……………………………………………………………………………. ii
INTRODUCTION ……………..……………………………………………………….. 1
LITERATURE REVIEW ………………………………………………………………. 3
Prevalence of Food Insecurity …………………………………………….. 3
Health Risks of Food Insecurity …………………………………………... 5
Health risks …………………………………………………………..... 6
Poor diet quality ……………………………………………………...... 7
Assistance Programs Targeting Food Insecurity ……………………… 9
Federal level …………………………………………………………… 9
Community level ……………………………………………………... 10
Patterns of community-level usage ………………………………... 13
Food pantry distribution methods ………………………………….. 14
Nutrition Education ………………………………………………………… 18
Nutrition education and diet quality in low-income populations .... 19
Nutrition education and food security ……………………………… 20
METHODS ……………………………………………………………………………. 22
Study Design ………………………………………………………………... 22
Participants ………………………………………………………………….. 22
Procedure ……………………………………………………………………. 22
Instruments ………………………………………………………………….. 25
Data Analysis ……………………………………………………………….. 25
RESULTS …………………………………………………………………………….. 27
Demographics of Food Pantry Coordinators …………………………. 27
Characteristics of Food Pantries ………………………………………... 27
Availability of Foods at Food Pantries …………………………………. 29
Benefits of Choice Pantry Distribution ………………………………… 34
Challenges within Current Distribution Systems …………………….. 35
Strategies to Increase Food Item Availability at Food Pantries …… 36
Nutrition Education at Food Pantries …………………………………... 39
DISCUSSION ………………………………………………………………………… 46
CONCLUSION ……………………………………………………………………….. 53
IMPLICATIONS ……………………………………………………………………… 54
REFERENCES ………………………………………………………………………. 55

iv

Tables
Page
Table 1. Key In-depth Interview Questions ……………………………………… 24
Table 2. Demographics of Food Pantry Coordinators …………………………. 27
Table 3. Characteristics of Food Pantries ……………………………………….. 28
Table 4. Availability of Dairy Foods at Food Pantries ………………………….. 29
Table 5. Availability of Grains at Food Pantries ………………………………… 30
Table 6. Availability of Protein Foods at Food Pantries ………………………... 31
Table 7. Availability of Fruits at Food Pantries ………………………………….. 32
Table 8. Availability of Vegetables at Food Pantries …………………………… 33
Table 9. Availability of Limited Intake Category at Food Pantries …………….. 33
Table 10. Benefits of Choice Pantry Distribution …………………………………. 35
Table 11. Challenges within Current Distribution Systems ……………………… 36
Table 12. Strategies to Obtain Food Donations ………………………………….. 37
Table 13. Strategies to Increase Availability of Healthy Foods …………………. 38
Table 14. Availability of Nutrition Education at Food Pantries ………………….. 39
Table 15. Current Efforts to Promote Healthy Eating for Clients ……………….. 40
Table 16. Barriers to Promoting Healthy Eating …………………….................... 42
Table 17. Most Beneficial Topics/Forms of Nutrition Education ………………... 44
Table 18. Resource Needs to Provide Nutrition Education ……………………... 45

Figures
Figure 1. Emergency Food Relief System ………………………………………… 14

v

INTRODUCTION
Food insecurity is a concern for a many American families; in 2014
seventeen million households were food insecure, or 14% of our population.1 The
USDA defines food security as having consistent, dependable access to
sufficient amounts of food to support an active, healthy lifestyle and not meeting
these qualifications is defined as food insecurity.2 Within Ohio, and Hamilton
County specifically this is even more concerning, with 18.6% of Hamilton County
reporting as food insecure in 2013.3
The rate of food insecurity is higher than the national average among
households with income at or below the Federal poverty line as well as singleparent households and Non-Hispanic Black- and Hispanic-headed households.1
Many low-income neighborhoods that have high rates of food insecurity may also
have limited access to healthy food options, which can negatively impact diet
quality due to the high availability of calorie-dense, high-fat foods that are less
expensive as compared to healthier, higher-quality items and fresh produce.4-8
The impact of these environmental and socioeconomic factors on food insecure
households may pose additional health challenges, as food insecure status is
associated with low diet quality and increased risk of diet-related chronic
diseases. 4,9-11
In order to address the food insecurity issue there are several relief
programs including the federally funded food and nutrition assistance programs
and the community-level food relief system. Food pantries represent the primary
community-level organizations that directly serve clients. These pantries are

1

public or private nonprofit organizations that distribute food to low-income and
unemployed households, including food from the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) as well as additional food sources to relieve situations of emergency and
distress related to limited food availability.12 Some food pantries assume larger
roles within their community by offering additional services or assisting their
clients with application to assistance programs, including the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), housing assistance, social service
referrals and other government assistance programs.13 The availability of these
services is known to be variable and dependent on the unique resources of each
pantry, but one service some pantries offer to their clients is nutrition education.13
Nutrition education programs are of particular relevance and importance within
pantry client populations, because nutrition education has been shown to be an
effective strategy to improve food security and diet quality within low-income,
food-insecure populations.14-16
While it is known that the emergency food relief system can alleviate
hunger and nutrition education programs can improve food security and diet
quality, there is limited information available on what foods are distributed at local
pantries and the availability of nutrition education programs.13-17 The objectives of
this study are to explore the availability of food and nutrition education at food
pantries and assess the perceived barriers and needs to offer nutrition education
to pantry clients.

2

LITERATURE REVIEW
Prevalence of Food Insecurity
One of the most basic human needs is access to food, and unfortunately
there are many families within the United States of America who are struggling to
make sure there is enough food on their table every night. In order to effectively
describe and measure the availability of food the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) has defined food security as the condition of having
consistent, dependable access to sufficient amounts of food to support an active,
healthy lifestyle and not meeting these qualifications is defined as food
insecurity.2 Food security can be further broken down into high food security and
marginal food security. High food security is defined as having no reported
indications of food-access problems or limitations and marginal food security
includes those households with one or two reported indications, which are
typically anxiety over food sufficiency or amount of food in the house with little or
no indication of changes in diet. Food insecurity can also be broken down into
two categories: low food security and very low food security. Low food security is
defined as when a household reports reduced quality, variety, or desirability in
their regular diet, with little or no indication of reduced amount of food intake.
Very low food security is defined as when a household reports with multiple
indications of a disrupted eating pattern that reduced amount of food intake.2
These terms are regularly used when referring to the populations that utilize food
pantries and nutrition assistance programs, as these programs were designed to
help improve food security among the populations they serve.1

3

In 2014, 17.4 million households were food insecure, or 14.0% of our
population, with 5.6% of that same group falling into the very low food security
category.1 Low-income households (with income below 185% of poverty
threshold) had higher rates (34.8%) of food insecurity than the national average
(14.0%).1 The USDA ERS report also revealed that there are several
demographic groups with higher rates of food insecurity; households with
children (19.2%), households headed by single parents (35.3% for single woman,
21.7% for single man), and households headed by minorities (26.1% for Black,
non-Hispanics, 22.4% for Hispanics).1 While there is considerable variance in the
prevalence of food insecurity among demographic groups, a strong association
exists between low-income households and food insecurity, illustrated by the fact
that in 2014, 39.5% of households with annual incomes at or below the poverty
line were food insecure.1 Using the average prevalence rates from 2012-2014, it
can be seen that Ohio was one of fourteen states with a significantly higher rate
of food insecurity (16.9%, 90-percent confidence (t > 1.645)) than the national
average (14.3%) within these three years.1 Within Hamilton County, which covers
a large area of the metropolitan “greater Cincinnati” region, the food insecurity
rate was even more concerning, as the prevalence of food insecurity was 18.6%
in 2013.3 The higher prevalence of food insecurity within Ohio and Hamilton
County specifically highlight the significance of this issue to the local population.

4

Health Risks of Food Insecurity
Food insecurity becomes increasingly concerning when health risks are
taken into account. The food insecure populations simultaneously represent
groups that are at higher risk of diet-related chronic disease. Using data from
NHANES (1999-2004) food insecurity was found to be associated with selfreported hypertension (adjusted relative risk (ARR) 1.20; 95%CI, 1.04-1.38) and
self-reported hyperlipidemia (ARR 1.30; 95%CI, 1.09-1.55) and was also
associated with laboratory examination of hypertension and diabetes (ARR 1.21;
95%CI, 1.04-1.41 and ARR 1.48; 95% CI, 0.94-2.32, respectively).10 Food
insecurity has been identified to increase risk of obesity also, but this relationship
is complex due to mediators of obesity such as marital status, stress level,
participation in food assistance programs, and gender. Gender is a powerful
mediator of obesity as it is related to food security, as shown by the 1999-2002
NHANES done by Wilde and Peterman using around 10,000 adults as a sample.
After adjusting for race/ethnicity, household income, education level, and current
health status significant associations existed among women between obese
status and food security.18 Using multivariate analysis, women in marginally food
secure households (OR 1.58 ± 1.96 SE (95% CI)) and food insecure households
without hunger (OR 1.76 ± 1.96 SE (95% CI)) were significantly more likely to be
obese than women in fully food secure households.18 However this relationship
was not consistent among men.18 Another study in a sample of low-income
parents made up of mostly female minorities found that food insecure adults
were over 2-times as likely to be obese as compared to those who were food

5

secure (OR = 2.45; 95% CI=1.15-5.25, p=0.02]).19 Although many studies
indicate a positive association between food insecurity and obesity the evidence
is somewhat mixed, likely due to the complex interactions of mediators of obesity
as highlighted in the Franklin et al. review of food insecurity and obesity.20
Poor diet quality
One potential cause of this notable health disparity that exists in the food
insecure population lies in the complex relationship that exists between food
insecurity, low-income, and low-diet quality. The association between diet quality
and food insecurity can be seen in these two example studies: one study of
households in Mississippi found that food secure households scored higher
Healthy Eating Index- Vegetable consumption (p=0.02) than the food insecure
adults of this sample.9 Another study done in a low-income neighborhood of
Connecticut found that in a sample recruited from local food pantries (N=212),
food-secure participants were twice as likely to eat fruits and vegetables as foodinsecure participants (p = .04) according to a logistic regression model designed
to predict diet quality using their fruit and vegetable consumption survey results.11
Diet quality may also be affected by low-income status, as shown in this study
that found that lower-income was associated with lower expenditures on food,
lower fruit and vegetable consumption, and overall lower diet quality than higherincome populations.4 This relationship was described well in an Economic
Research Service report done by the USDA, who found that lower-income
households spend significantly less (about $1.43 per capita per week) on fruits
and vegetables than higher-income households.21 This difference in spending

6

highlights a limitation some low-income families face when attempting to
consume sufficient fruits and vegetables to meet the fruit and vegetable intake
guidelines.
Factors affecting diet quality
The dietary behaviors of an individual are developed over time and can be
influenced by a variety of factors unique to each individual. Some of these factors
include knowledge, beliefs, and perceptions about nutrition and health, all of
which can also be influenced by other internal or external factors to the
individual. It can be difficult to account for all of these mediators at once, but
using different scales literature has revealed that diet and health-related
knowledge positively affect diet quality and food purchasing behavior.22-24
Limited availability of healthy food options often represents another dietquality barrier for low-income populations. Many low-income areas of the US
have limited access to large grocery stores or supermarkets that provide access
to healthy affordable food; this is referred to as a food desert. In these food
deserts, where there are notably less supermarkets and residents may rely on
the more prevalent convenience stores or fast-food restaurants for their dietary
needs, this environment limits access to fresh fruits and vegetables while
providing easy access to energy dense foods that convenience stores and fastfood restaurants typically sell.5 The limited access to supermarkets in low-income
neighborhoods is shown by the fact that low-income ZIP codes only have 75% as
many chain supermarkets available as middle-income ZIP codes.6 In addition to
the limited access to supermarkets, there are more fast-food restaurants in near-

7

low- and middle-income neighborhoods, which have been shown to have the
highest number of available restaurants with 1.24 and 1.22 times number of fullservice restaurants and 1.34 and 1.28 times the number of fast-food restaurants
as compared to high-income neighborhoods.7 One study that examined the food
environment and the daily recommendations for fruit and vegetable intake found
a direct relationship between living in a zip code with at least one supermarket
and meeting the USDA Dietary Guidelines for fruit and vegetable intake. The
presence of each additional supermarket was related to a 32% and an 11%
increase in meeting guidelines for combined fruit and vegetable intake for black
and white demographic groups respectively.25 In addition to this the proximity to a
supermarket can impact diet quality as measured by longer commutes and
farther distances to supermarket stores have been shown to significantly
decrease fruit consumption.8 The increased availability of fast-food and lower
availability of fresh produce in some low-income neighborhoods creates an
unhealthy food environment, the extent of which is reported in a review paper by
Hilmers et al. which examined 24 peer-reviewed studies focused on food
environment in low-income neighborhoods.5
Currently in the US products with refined grains, added sugars and added
fats are readily available and are also some of the lowest-cost sources of dietary
energy, whereas healthier options like lean meats, fish, and fresh fruits and
vegetables all typically cost more.4 This combination of factors; limited income,
limited availability of healthy foods, and less-expensive food providing

8

inadequate nutrient content highlight a diet disparity that the food insecure, lowincome, and minority populations of the US face.
Assistance Programs Targeting Food Insecurity
Federal level
In order to provide assistance to the food insecure populations in the US
there are several federally funded Food and Nutrition Services (FNS) that are
designed to address the issues outlined above and provide access to
supplemental food. The largest of these programs is SNAP, which provides lowincome individuals and households with funds to purchase food items from SNAP
authorized retailers (most Supermarkets). In 2014 SNAP provided 46,530,000
people with benefits. The foods available for purchase with SNAP include:
breads, cereals, fruits & vegetables, meats, fish, poultry, dairy, seeds/plants that
can produce food, but there is no nutritional consideration for what items are
bought with SNAP, as “junk foods” are also eligible purchases. Other programs
designed for target food insecure populations include: The Commodity
Supplemental Food Program (CSFP), which works to provide low-income elderly
(age 60+) population with supplemental USDA foods and The Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), which
provides supplemental nutritious foods, nutrition education, and
screening/referral services to pregnant and breastfeeding women, as well as
their infants (up to 1 year) and children (under age 5). In addition to these there
are also many USDA funded programs designed to provide eligible
children/adolescents with access to free or reduced price meals (including

9

breakfast, lunch, and afterschool snacks) while attending elementary and
secondary schools.26
The federally funded program specifically designed to support the
emergency food relief system (including food banks and food pantries) is The
Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP), which purchases USDA food
and commodities and makes these price-subsidized foods available to State
Distribution agencies. The types of foods that the USDA purchases vary
depending on the state’s preference as well as the agriculture market availability.
In 2014 there were nearly 90 different products available including: canned fruits,
canned vegetables, fruit juice, dried egg mix, meat/poultry/fish, dried beans,
pasta products, milk, rice/grits/cereal, and soups.27 These federally funded
commodity programs are massively important to the food relief network, as
TEFAP provides approximately one-quarter of the food that passes through the
Feeding America food distribution network.13 In addition to the purchasing of
foods for distribution, this large-scale program also provides funding for
administrative support within the emergency food relief system.
Community Level
The emergency food relief system was put in place to help remedy the
food insecurity issue within specific target areas. The community-level of this
system originated in the 1960s, and has grown into hugely successful,
nationwide non-profit organizations. Within this system food banks are defined as
the larger non-profit, charitable organizations that collect and distribute
government subsidized and donated grocery products to smaller agencies

10

(mostly food pantries) for distribution to the public. Food pantries are defined as
public or private nonprofit organizations that distribute food to low-income and
unemployed households, including food from sources other than the USDA, to
relieve situations of emergency and distress related to food availability.12 These
sites strive to distribute food to their clients, alleviating immediate hunger by
providing food at no cost. The privatized, voluntary aspect of food pantries allow
them to be uniquely tailored to the communities they serve. Many of these
community-based organizations rely on volunteers as staff and administrative
leaders.13
The Feeding America network - the largest domestic hunger-relief charity,
collectively distributes three billion pounds of food and grocery goods, which
reaches more than 37 million Americans yearly.13 Such a large number of clients
are reached due to the cooperation of 200+ food banks and 61,000 food pantries,
shelters, kitchens, and youth/senior feeding programs that receive products from
Feeding America. Some of the organizations that run these food pantries offer
services in addition to providing food, which may include SNAP services, WIC
services, nutrition education programs, utility bill assistance, employment
training/assistance, social service referral, and a variety of other services. Only
considering the food pantry aspect of these organizations, they have great
potential to address both the food insecurity and poor diet quality issues of many
food insecure households.
The emergency food relief system was designed to be a short-term,
supplemental food source for low-income households, but in recent years the use

11

of these resources has increased dramatically. The Feeding America report
Hunger in America 2010 found that the Feeding America food banks served 46%
more clients in 2009 as compared to 2005, increasing from 25 million clients to
37 million clients.28 There are many factors that may have played a role in this
dramatic increase, but one event in particular was the economic downturn of
2008. The US the poverty rate increased by 1.9% (6.3 million people) between
2007 and 2009, increasing the population eligible for emergency food
assistance.29 The Farm Bill of 2008 attempted to address this increased need for
food and nutrition services by increasing government spending on SNAP,
expanding the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program for children, and increased
spending on commodity purchasing through TEFAP and the Commodity
Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) that would make its way into the
emergency food relief system.26 Unfortunately while the demand for these
services has remained high, federal support for the food relief system has been
scaled back in more recent years. The amount of federal commodities provided
by TEFAP, which provides a significant portion of the food that moves through
Feeding America and food banks everywhere, dropped by almost 30% between
2010 and 2011.13 The Farm Bill of 2014 attempted to remedy this issue by
providing an additional $250 million for TEFAP as well as $225 million to be
focused on making nutritious food more accessible through the Healthy Food
Financing Initiative and increased purchasing of fruits and vegetables.

12

Patterns of community-level usage
With many low-income households still struggling with food security, many
food pantry clients are not only using food pantries in times of “emergency”, but
have begun using food pantries as a regular supplemental food source in their
diet. This long-term usage strategy has made it difficult for some food
banks/pantries to acquire sufficient quantities of food to distribute.13 The Hunger
in America study which conducted 42,441 interviews with food pantry clients
examined this issue and found that 36% of pantry clients were “recurrent clients”
who reported visiting a food pantry at least once in each month for 12 months,
with 54% of pantry clients meeting the “frequent” client description of visiting a
food pantry at least 6 months out of the previous 12 months. The “recurrent”
clients average number of consecutive months using food pantries was 28.3
months, while the “frequent” clients average number of consecutive months was
13.7 months.28 With the majority of the food pantry clients interviewed falling
under the “frequent” description, this illustrates the prevalence of long-term
reliance on food pantries as a source of supplemental food. At the time these
interviews took place, 41% of the clients reported receiving SNAP benefits,
revealing that a large portion of the population receiving SNAP utilizes other
food/nutrition assistance programs to provide adequate food for their
household.28 Many low-income pantry clients may qualify for multiple assistance
programs including SNAP, CSFP, as well as receiving benefits from welfare or
social security. This trend of utilizing multiple programs designed to promote food
security may indicate that the lower-income population is having difficulty

13

providing sufficient food for their households, leading to longer-term usage of
these programs.30 Figure 1 below displays sources of food items within the
emergency food relief system as well as the point of contact with clients at local
food pantries.
Figure 1. Emergency Food Relief System

Food pantry distribution methods
In order to address the issue of food insecurity within their communities,
food pantries design their own distribution methods that fit the unique
capabilities, capacity, and resources available to each pantry. Factors such as
the availabilities of space, storage, volunteers, and funding play important roles
in the design of a distribution method that suits each food pantry location. The
wide variety in size and scope of food pantry organizations is reflected by the
implementation of different distribution methods. There are two general
categories of distribution that are referred to as traditional and choice.

14

The traditional distribution method provides food to pantry clients in prebagged packages so each client receives very similar items when they visit the
pantry. This system allows the pantries to control the amount of food and the
contents of the package each client receives. There are some limitations of this
system; one being that it does not consider the unique needs of the clients. The
prepared box may leave the pantry clients with items that they may not need or
want when dietary restrictions, preparatory limitations, taste preference, and
client food cultures are considered.31 Additionally, although there is the potential
for the pantry to control the nutritional content of the boxes/bags given to clients,
in many cases the clients are given food/products based on their availability
rather than consideration of nutrition.32 This distribution system can result in
inefficient waste of resources, as the clients may not use the items or have the
knowledge/equipment needed to prepare the items given to them in their premade package. This inefficiency then becomes a two-sided problem, as the
clients may throw away these items, and the pantry staff that prepared the
packages for distribution then wasted their time and resources. Another issue
raised by this distribution method is the “dignity” aspect of the traditional system
that some clients do not appreciate; by giving “handouts” the clients lose their
ability to choose their own food, which further limits their perceived independence
and self-sufficiency.32
The “choice” distribution system revolves around the principle that the
clients choose which foods/items they receive. These pantries often resemble
small grocery stores that give clients the opportunity to “shop” for products,

15

allowing clients to choose which foods/items they will take home. By allowing the
clients to choose which products they want the waste generated by some
traditional pantries is inherently avoided, as the products selected by the clients
will likely be fully utilized.
There are various ways to implement a choice distribution system, which
vary in size/scope depending on the space and staff available at the pantry. Even
if pantry space is an issue there are ways to implement a client choice system,
including providing a list to the clients and having the pantry staff prepare
packages of their selected items. In pantries where “shopping” space is available
there are several systems that allow the clients to “shop” while allowing the
pantry to monitor distribution, including: adjusting allotted distribution for
household size, setting a specific number of items, a weight limit, or setting
theoretical “prices” of goods.33 However the pantry is organized, the central
theme among choice pantries is that the clients have the freedom to make their
own food choices. Choice distribution may require more staff
availability/interaction with clients, which may limit the implementation of this
distribution system in some pantries. Choice distribution also provides the
opportunity for added benefits to the clients, pantry staff, and the pantry itself. By
setting selection guidelines based on food group of the items the pantry can
promote a healthy distribution of food groups, which may provide
information/nutrition benefits that may not be available at a traditional pantry.
Giving clients the option to select their own items should inherently reduce waste,
as they are unlikely to discard any products that they chose themselves. Another

16

benefit of the choice system for the pantry is that the pantry staff can track which
products/food items are highest in demand and then adjust the foods they
order/offer based on client demand. Within the choice system the opportunity to
implement systems that can help promote healthy eating as well as selfsufficiency exists.
Literature that compares the efficacy of the different distribution systems is
limited, but Martin et al. (2013) compared the food security, self-sufficiency, and
fruit and vegetable consumption of traditional pantry clients to choice pantry
clients. This study was designed to test the Freshplace intervention, which
included access to a choice pantry, individualized referral services, and meetings
with a project manager for motivational interviewing and to set personal goals
related to lifestyle improvement. The participants in this study were recruited from
traditional pantries of a low-income (39.3% poverty rate) neighborhood of
Hartford, CT and the participants in the Freshplace intervention (N=113) could
“shop” at the choice pantry twice per month, and had monthly meetings with the
project manager to set goals and plans to achieve said goals, additionally there
were referral services available based upon participant request, with these
services varying from social services to onsite cooking classes.34 The control
group (N=115) received food from traditional pantries, with no limit on the number
of visits (89% of the control group visited food pantries at least twice per month).
Follow-ups were then conducted quarterly using validated food security, selfsufficiency, and fruit and vegetable consumption surveys. The results revealed
that the Freshplace intervention group had significant improvements in self-

17

sufficiency score at every follow-up and fruit and vegetable consumption at 3, 9
and 12 months, while the control group did not change at any follow-up points.34
After the 12-month follow-up period and controlling for demographics, household
size, and baseline scores the intervention group was less than half as likely as
the control group to experience very-low food security (ROR=0.42) and had
increased their fruit and vegetable consumption by 1 serving per day.34 Although
this study showed some significant results, it is difficult to claim that these
changes in food security and self-sufficiency are related solely to the choice
pantry. The motivational interviews and referral services likely also played roles
in the benefits that the Freshplace intervention provided to its clients. It is difficult
to quantify the differences between food pantry distribution systems, as there are
many other factors that influence food security, but the Martin et al. study
highlights the concept that a food pantry presents an opportunity to provide more
services than food alone to the lower-income population, assuming the resources
are available.
Nutrition Education
Nutrition education is one strategy that has been shown to be effective in
improving dietary quality through increasing fruit and vegetable consumption in
adult populations.35 Nutrition education is defined as any combination of
educational strategies, accompanied by environmental supports, designed to
facilitate voluntary adoption of food choices and other food- and nutrition-related
behaviors conducive to health and well being. Nutrition education can delivered
through multiple venues involving activities at the individual, community, and

18

policy levels.36 Food pantries represent a potential point of contact to deliver
nutrition education services to low-income and low food-security populations that
may have low dietary quality and/or low fruit and vegetable consumption.4,9,11,21
There are federally funded agencies designed to implement nutrition education
programs; the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) and Center for Nutrition Policy
and Promotion (CNPP) are agencies of USDA that promote access to healthy
and safe food while working to improve the health and well being of Americans
by promoting dietary guidance. These agencies receive federal funding to
provide nutrition education, some of which may be delivered through community
level emergency food relief. SNAP-Education (SNAP-Ed) is one of the federally
funded nutrition education programs that specifically targets SNAP users and
focuses on promotion of healthful food choices, smart budgeting, food prep and
cooking skills, and promotion of the MyPlate nutrition guidelines.26 SNAP-Ed is
implemented on a state-by-state basis, with agencies often providing education
opportunities in targeted areas, sometimes utilizing food pantries or food banks
to reach SNAP participants.
Nutrition education and diet quality in low-income populations
The effectiveness of nutrition education, often measured with fruit and
vegetable consumption as a proxy for dietary quality, in low-income populations
can be seen in existing literature, as shown in the following studies. The Devine
et al. study examined the effectiveness of a nutrition education program designed
to increase fruit and vegetable consumption in low-income women through a
program that included food experiences, positive social settings, and flexible

19

meetings.14 The participants included 269 low-income adults from New York
divided into 32 intervention and 10 control groups. After the 6, 90-min weekly
sessions the intervention group reported significantly increased fruit and
vegetable consumption (1.6 times/day vs. 0.8 times/day in control, p<0.05) and
were found to be 0.44 times more likely to consume fruits and vegetables 5 or
more times/day (p<0.05) than the control groups.14 Another study that examined
the effectiveness of a cancer-prevention intervention (which included diet
modification and physical activity increases) in low-income neighborhoods found
that after 8 months the intervention group (N= 1088) had a significantly greater
change in fruit and vegetable consumption (met 5-a day recommendation)
(p=0.005) as compared to the control group (N=1131).37
Nutrition education and food security
In order to improve the food security of an individual it is important to
make better food choices and improve nutrition-related behaviors. Some forms of
nutrition education aim to improve cooking skills, shopping strategies, or label
reading, enabling the participants to make better food choices. Measurements of
food security are one way to examine the effectiveness of nutrition education
programs. One example of this is the Dollahite et al. study that examined the
effectiveness of one of the federally funded nutrition education programs by
comparing food security behavior questionnaire scores before and after the
participants completed (N=15,846), or dropped out of (N=300) the Expanded
Food and Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP) after it was implemented in New
York.16 This education program targeted households at or below 185% of the

20

federal poverty line, and some of the class topics included shopping strategies
and budget management. After controlling for sociodemographic differences and
delivery method of the education, the participants who completed the class
reported significant decreases in food insecurity when compared to those who
dropped out of the classes.16 Additionally, among the graduates there was a
direct and significant association between the number of classes completed and
greater decreases in food insecurity score, further supporting that the classes
were effective.16 Another study that focused on a nutrition education program for
food pantry clients (N=63) in Rhode Island found that implementing a six-week
cooking program promoting plant-based recipes effectively improved participants
Food Insecurity Scores after a six-month follow up period (p<0.01).15 This
improvement in Food Insecurity Score, was achieved through behavior
modification, specifically the participants cooking and shopping behaviors. The
changes in cooking patterns were seen in the significant increases in utilization of
the plant-based recipes and the types of fruits and vegetables consumed per
month (p<0.01).15 The impact on purchasing patterns was revealed by examining
the grocery receipts of participating clients, which revealed significant decreases
in purchases of meat, carbonated beverages, desserts, snacks, and total
groceries (p<0.01), the result of these behavior changes was reflected in the
decreased Food Insecurity Score of participants.15

21

METHODS
Study Design
This study is a cross-sectional descriptive study using mixed methods including a
survey and in-depth interview to collect information from food pantry coordinators
in the Greater Cincinnati area.
Participants
Approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Board at the
University of Cincinnati. Food pantry coordinators (who will be referred to simply
as “coordinators” from now on) in Greater Cincinnati (N=65) were invited to
complete a survey through e-mail or mail. Forty-one coordinators completed the
study, and they received a $15 Kroger gift card as incentive after completion of
both study components.
Procedure
A list of food pantries containing addresses, phone numbers, and emails
of food pantries in the Greater Cincinnati area was compiled using information
from the Freestore Foodbank, and the website
(http://www.foodpantries.org/ci/oh-cincinnati). Prior to making contact with the
coordinators an employee of the Freestore Foodbank (Community Partnership
Manager for Hamilton County) sent an email to the Freestore Foodbank affiliate
pantries. This email included a brief summary of the research study as well as an
introduction to the Research Assistant (RA). After the introductory e-mail, the RA
sent out an initial e-mail with a link to an electronic survey using Qualtrics, which
contained a copy of the informed consent document on the first page of the

22

survey. As the coordinators completed the survey, the RA contacted
coordinators to schedule an in-depth interview in the earliest available time of the
coordinators. After 1-2 weeks of the initial email being sent, the RA sent a
reminder email (containing the same information and link as the previous email)
to those who had not completed the survey. Coordinators who had not
responded to the first two emails received a hard copy of the survey and consent
form information via mail. Three weeks after the mail was sent, any remaining
coordinators who had not responded were contacted via phone and asked if they
wished to participate. If the coordinator indicated that they did wish to participate
via the reminder phone call, they were asked for their preferred method of
contact, and then the study introduction, informed consent form, and survey were
sent via preferred contact method. Those who indicated they did not wish to
participate, or did not respond to any methods of contact were excluded 48 hours
after the phone call recruitment attempts.
The in-depth interviews were conducted privately via phone or on-site at
the food pantries where the coordinators were working from 9/16/15 to 11/19/15.
Eleven of the in-depth interviews were conducted via phone and thirty in-depth
interviews were conducted on-site at the food pantries. Each interview was
recorded on two separate audio recorders to ensure proper audio recordings.
When interviews were completed on-site, the incentive $15 Kroger’s gift card was
given immediately after completion of the interview, for those completed via
phone the gift card was mailed to the pantry location within 2 weeks of the
interview date.

23

The In-depth interview questions were developed through examining
previous literature and identifying challenges that coordinators may face
regarding food availability and services offered. The RA designed the interview
questions and piloted the interview questions with a previous food pantry
coordinator. The interview questions consisted of 9 key semi-structured
questions and up to 27 probing questions that explored the coordinators
experiences and perceptions of the barriers and needs to provide the food and
services at their food pantry. Specifically the interview questions were designed
to capture the coordinators’ perceptions and experiences with their distribution
system, efforts to acquire donations, and their interest in providing and
needs/barriers to provide nutrition education. Some of the key questions are
shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Key In-Depth Interview Questions
• From your perspective what areas work well and what areas may need
improvement within your current distribution method?
• How have you been establishing partnerships with other agencies or your
donors?
• What guidelines do you provide to your partner organizations if you are
planning a food drive or accepting any type of donations?
• What strategies does your pantry use to obtain healthy food items?
• What efforts does your pantry make to promote healthy eating for the
clients?
• How interested would you be in offering nutrition education to your clients
at this pantry site?
• What resources do you feel would be needed to offer nutrition education?
• What topics or forms of nutrition education do you believe would be the
most beneficial for the clients?
• What type of questions about nutrition do you receive from your clients?

24

Instruments
The survey was composed of 25-questions including demographic
information of the coordinators, distribution method information about each
pantry, and information about the services offered at the food pantry. In addition,
the availability of 46 food items commonly found in food pantries were assessed
using a modified Nutrition Environment Measures Survey – Store (NEMS-S),
focusing on foods that are regularly available in food pantries. The foods
“typically” available at pantries were determined by consulting the Freestore
Foodbank Community Partnership Manager for Hamilton County and a previous
food pantry coordinator from the Cincinnati area. The availability of each food
was explored using a 4-point Likert scale with response options including, Never,
Sometimes, Often, and Always.
Data Analysis
The online survey data was collected using Qualtrics and were then
exported into IBM SPSS Statistics 22 and descriptive statistics were conducted
to summarize the characteristics of the coordinators, the food pantries, and the
availability of foods at food pantries.38 The surveys obtained via mail were
entered verbatim by the RA into the Qualtrics data set. For ease of interpretation
the food availability tables were separated into each food group, as defined by
39

the MyPlate guidelines.

For a comparison of protein sources beans were put

into the protein foods category. The baked goods and snack categories were put
into the grain food group, as most of the items included in the descriptions are
refined grains, although ice cream would be in the dairy food group it is not

25

commonly found at food pantries and is unlikely to affect the results. For
qualitative data analysis, the digital audio files from the in-depth interview
sessions were transcribed verbatim by the RA and then each transcript was
reviewed by a research aide for accuracy. Using the pilot interview with a
previous food pantry coordinator and the first two interviews of the study, a
codebook was generated by the research team. This codebook was modified as
new codes and themes emerged in the interviews. The transcripts were coded
independently by three members of the research team, and then each code was
discussed until a consensus was reached by three independent coders. Each
consensus-coded transcript was entered into NVIVO 10 software and exemplary
quotes for each theme were identified.

26

RESULTS
Demographics of Food Pantry Coordinators
Forty-one food pantry coordinators (63.4 ± 9.1 years) completed both the
survey and in-depth interview (63.1% response rate). Most of the participants
were non-Hispanic white (73%), and female (73%), who were well educated (a
bachelor’s or advanced/professional degree, 61%) and worked as a volunteer
within their organization (63%) as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Demographics of Food Pantry Coordinators (N=41)
Measure
Gender
Male
Female
Age (mean ± SD), yrs
Age range
Race
Non-Hispanic White
Non-Hispanic Black/African American
Other
Education Level
High School or equivalent
Some college/training
College degree
Advanced degree
Employee/volunteer status at pantry
Employee
Volunteer

Frequency (%)
11 (27)
30 (73)
63.4 ± 9.1
34-82
30 (75)
6 (15)
4 (10)
9 (22)
6 (15)
16 (39)
10 (24)
15 (37)
26 (63)

Characteristics of Food Pantries
The number of clients served at food pantries varied from 8 to 1,070
households per month. The majority of food pantries used some degree of client
choice distribution (76%, choice or combination of choice and traditional
distribution) and monitored food pantry usage of their clients using an electronic
tracking system (66%). Less than one-third have offered some form of nutrition
27

education (29%) as shown in Table 3. Most of the food pantries reported that
they had at least three partner organizations that donate food items including the
Freestore Foodbank (FSFB), grocery stores, restaurants, bakeries, schools,
churches, and other donors. The FSFB was reported as a major supplier, with an
average of 72% of foods distributed being supplied by FSFB.
Table 3. Characteristics of Food Pantries
Measure
Hours of operation per month (hours)
Distribution Method
Traditional
Choice
Combination
Other
Electronic tracking system used
Yes
No
Other services offered
SNAP application assistance
Housing services
Utility bill assistance
Ohio Benefits Bank
Other
Number of volunteers per week
Number of partner organizations
One
Two
Three
Four
Five or more
Proportion of food supplied by FSFB
Number of households served per month
Number of clients served per month

28

Mean ± SD (Range)
or Frequency (%)
24.3 ± 26.9 (3-150)
9 (22.0)
23 (56.1)
8 (19.5)
1 (2.4)
27 (65.9)
14 (34.1)
4 (9.8)
7 (17.1)
13 (31.7)
8 (19.5)
22 (53.7)
21 ± 35 (0-220)
7 (17.5)
8 (20.0)
12 (30.0)
7 (17.5)
6 (15.0)
72.1 ± 26.0 (5-100)
262 ± 253 (8-1070)
719 ± 667 (14-2567)

Availability of Foods at Food Pantries
The availability of foods at each pantry as assessed by the survey is
shown below in Tables 4-9. Information on all of the items in each food category
was not provided by some coordinators and the number of responses ranges
from 37 to 41 for each food item. Overall “healthy” items were less available than
the comparable “unhealthy” items, with reduced fat, low-sodium, or whole
grain/multi-grain alternatives reported available all the time less frequently than
their counterparts. Fresh fruits and vegetables specifically were less available
than other staple grocery items.
Table 4. Availability of Dairy Foods at Food Pantries (N, %)
Food Item

Never

Sometimes

Often

Always

Milk – whole milk

22 (56.4)

15 (38.5)

0 (0)

2 (5.1)

10 (24.4)

18 (43.9)

6 (14.6)

7 (17.1)

17 (48.6)

12 (34.3)

4 (11.4)

2 (5.7)

20 (51.3)

15 (38.5)

3 (7.7)

1(2.6)

Milk – reduced/low-fat options (2%,
skim, fat free)
Dairy – regular “full fat” (cheese,
yogurt, etc.)
Dairy – reduced/low-fat options

Overall, regardless the type of dairy food items, the availability of dairy
food items were somewhat limited; however, reduced/low fat milk was more
available (often/all of the time, 31.7%) compared to whole fat milk (5.1%). In
contrast, other reduced/low-fat dairy items were less often available (often/all the
time, 10.3%) compared to regular dairy items (often/all the time, 17.1%).

29

Table 5. Availability of Grains at Food Pantries (N, %)
Food Item

Never

Sometimes

Often

Always

Breads - white

4 (10.0)

7 (17.5)

14 (35.0)

15 (37.5)

3 (7.5)

9 (22.5)

12 (30.0)

16 (40.0)

(0)

2 (4.9)

12 (29.3)

27 (65.8)

0 (0)

4 (10.0)

17 (42.5)

19 (47.5)

Rice - white

1 (2.4)

5 (12.2)

14 (34.1)

21 (51.2)

Rice – brown, whole-grain

13 (34.2)

11 (28.9)

9 (23.7)

5 (13.2)

Pastas – white flour

2 (5.0)

2 (5.0)

17 (42.5)

19 (47.5)

Pastas - whole-grain, whole
wheat, multi-grain

3 (7.3)

14 (34.1)

16 (39.0)

8 (19.5)

Baked goods – regular

6 (15.0)

6 (15.0)

10 (25.0)

18 (45.0)

10 (25.6)

16 (41.0)

10 (25.6)

3 (7.7)

2 (5.0)

17 (42.5)

10 (25.0)

11 (27.5)

4 (9.8)

30 (73.2)

6 (14.6)

1 (2.4)

Breads – whole-grain, whole
wheat, multi-grain
Cereals – breakfast cereals,
granolas, etc.
Cereals - whole-grain, whole
wheat, multi-grain

Baked goods – reduced fat, lowfat
Snacks – cookies, crackers,
doughnuts, cakes, ice cream,
etc.
Snacks – reduced fat

Overall most grain products were reported available often or all of the time
by the majority of pantries, with exceptions of brown rice (36.9% available
often/all the time). Over two-thirds of food pantries carry white bread (72.5%) or
whole-grain, whole wheat or multi-grain breads (70.0%) often or all the time. The
availability of cereals including whole-grain, whole wheat, or multi-grain cereals
was even higher at over 90% often/all the time available. The baked goods and
snack item descriptions include refined grain items that may also be high in fat
such as baked goods and snack items (cookies, crackers, doughnuts, cakes,

30

etc.). These items were frequently available, with regular baked goods reported
available often/all the time at 70% of pantries, while snack items were available
often/all the time at 52.5% of pantries.
Table 6. Availability of Protein Foods at Food Pantries (N, %)
Food Item

Never

Sometimes

Often

Always

Meats – frozen, whole meats,
ground meats

0 (0)

4 (10.0)

6 (15.0)

30 (75.0)

Meats – canned

0 (0)

12 (30.8)

11 (28.2)

16 (41.0)

1 (2.6)

15 (38.5)

13 (33.3)

10 (25.6)

10 (26.3)

14 (36.8)

9 (23.7)

5 (13.2)

Seafood – frozen

21 (53.8)

14 (35.9)

3 (7.7)

1 (2.6)

Seafood – canned (in oil)

10 (25.6)

21 (53.8)

5 (12.8)

3 (7.7)

3 (7.5)

13 (32.5)

8 (20.0)

16 (40.0)

8 (20.5)

14 (35.9)

9 (23.1)

8 (20.5)

13 (38.2)

14 (41.2)

3 (8.8)

4 (11.8)

Beans – canned

0 (0)

5 (12.5)

14 (34.1)

21 (52.5)

Beans – canned, low-sodium

5 (12.8)

14 (35.9)

15 (38.5)

5 (12.8)

Beans – dried

3 (7.7)

12 (30.8)

11 (28.2)

13 (33.3)

Meats – processed (hot dogs,
franks, deli meats, etc.)
Meats – processed (reduced
fat, low-sodium, poultry
alternative)

Seafood – canned (lowsodium/in water)
Protein alternative – nut
butters, soy products, etc.
Protein alternative – reduced
fat

Meat categories were reported available often or all of the time at the
majority of pantries, with frozen whole/ground meats having the highest
availability of 90%. The only meat category with lower availability was reduced
fat, low-sodium, poultry alternative processed meats (available often/all of the
time, 36.9%). Comparing meats to the alternative sources of protein, the

31

alternative sources were reported as available often/all with similar frequency.
Seafood canned in water, low-sodium (60.0%), protein alternatives (nut butters,
soy products, etc.) (43.6%), canned beans (86.6%), low-sodium canned beans
(51.3%), and dried beans (61.5%) are healthy alternatives to meat items and had
similar availability to the meat protein categories.
Table 7. Availability of Fruits at Food Pantries (N, %)
Food Item

Never

Sometimes

Often

Always

Fruits – canned in heavy syrup

2 (5.0)

14 (35.0)

13 (32.5) 11 (27.5)

Fruits – canned in light syrup

0 (0)

11 (28.9)

14 (36.8) 13 (34.2)

Fruits – frozen

12 (31.6)

18 (47.4)

6 (15.8)

2 (5.3)

Fruits - fresh

7 (17.9)

10 (25.6)

15 (38.5)

7 (17.9)

Beverages – 100% Juice

5 (12.2)

10 (24.4)

18 (43.9)

8 (19.5)

Canned fruits were reported available often/all the time at over two-thirds
of pantries with fruits canned in light syrup (71.0%) and fruits canned in heavy
syrup (60.0%) while frozen fruits (21.1%) and fresh fruits (56.4%) were less
frequently available. 100% juice was reported available often/all the time at
63.4% of pantries, much higher availability than the other sugar-sweetened
beverage options in the Limited Intake food group.

32

Table 8. Availability of Vegetables at Food Pantries (N, %)
Food Item

Never

Sometimes

Often

Always

Vegetables – canned

0 (0)

0 (0)

4 (9.8)

37 (90.2)

Vegetables – canned, low-sodium

4 (10.5)

19 (50.0)

12 (31.6)

3 (7.9)

Vegetables – frozen

16 (43.2)

12 (32.4)

6 (16.2)

3 (8.1)

Vegetables – fresh

7 (17.1)

11 (26.8)

12 (29.3) 11 (26.8)

All food pantries reported that they carry canned vegetables often/all the
time; however, other types of vegetables had lower availability. The low-sodium
canned vegetables were available (often/all the time, 39.5%), frozen vegetables
(24.3%), and fresh vegetables (56.1%).
Table 9. Availability of Limited Intake Category at Food Pantries (N, %)
Food Item

Never

Sometimes

Often

Always

Beverages – sugar sweetened
14 (34.1)
(Cola, fruit drinks, sodas, etc.)

23 (56.1)

3 (7.3)

1 (2.4)

Beverages – diet alternatives

20 (50.0)

18 (45.0)

1 (2.5)

1 (2.5)

Beverages – sports drinks

16 (40.0)

23 (57.5)

0 (0)

1 (2.5)

The only food items assessed that fit into the MyPlate limited intake
category were sugar-sweetened beverages, all of which had low availability at
the pantries. As shown by sugar sweetened beverages (9.7%), their diet
alternatives (5.0%), and sports drinks (2.5%) which were each rarely available
often/all the time.
The in-depth interview sessions focused on the coordinator’s perceptions
of their distribution method, how they acquire donations of foods to distribute,

33

and the availability of and barriers to providing nutrition education at their food
pantries.
Benefits of Choice Pantry Distribution System
The coordinators frequently commented on the differences between
choice distribution and traditional distribution systems. Coordinators identified
multiple benefits that choice distribution provided for the clients, such as:
perceived higher dignity level for the clients, opportunity to be exposed to new
food items, and increased likelihood for the clients to utilize the items they select.
The coordinators said that because the clients selected their own items, they felt
that the clients had increased dignity and would be more likely to use the items
they selected, inherently reducing wasted items. The coordinators also thought
that the choice distribution system may provide the opportunity for clients to try
new food items they may not have exposure to elsewhere. In addition,
coordinators identified client and volunteer interaction during distribution as a
benefit of choice distribution. They described the relationship between clients and
volunteers as an opportunity for positive interaction for both parties. Quotes
illustrating these themes are shown in Table 10.

34

Table 10. Benefits of Choice Pantry Distribution
Themes
Quotes
There’s less waste, let’s just say that, plus there's some dignity
Reduced
to it too that they actually get to choose rather than just being
waste
handed a bag of whatever we decided to put in that bag. –
Coordinator #21
When we first changed there was a lot of positive comments
made about being able to make their own choices themselves, I
think that it’s a more dignified way for them to come in, it's a
Perceived
better feel I think when they’re pushing the cart around, when
increased
they're making their own choices about what they get, so I think
client dignity
people just essentially have a pretty good feel that they’re
treated respectfully and that this is a you know, a good way for
them to get the food that they need. – Coordinator #27
People are taking the food that they choose, which means that
they are more apt to use it and because it is divided according
Opportunity for to the food pyramid they should be getting a variety of food and
clients to try
it is encouraging them to move forward in that direction. We
variety of
also have … dairy and they have fresh vegetables when that’s
foods
available and so they're encouraged to try out new recipes ...
So it should build ... their health in addition to feeding their
stomachs. – Coordinator #2
In the last 2 years when we have gone to the volunteer
shopping one-on-one we see a huge difference. People that
Positive
didn't take a lot of food in the old days—before we moved here
interaction
are taking more food and they're coming back and telling us
between
what they did. They're establishing a relationship with the
clients and
volunteers and the volunteers are giving them cooking ideas, so
volunteers
they're trying more things and we’re finding that this 1-on-1
distribution has really been helpful. – Coordinator #12
Challenges within Current Distribution Systems
Regardless of the distribution system that the pantry used, coordinators
frequently identified limited storage space, storage equipment, and transportation
as challenges they encounter within their current distribution system.
Coordinators described these areas as limiting their potential for improvement of
their current distribution system, as shown in Table 11.

35

Table 11. Challenges within Current Distribution Systems
Themes
Quotes
From a logistics perspective it would be nice to have more
storage space you know there’s times where we can’t accept
Limited storage
donations or you know purchase things from the Freestore ...
space
because we don't have the room to store it although we have
the money to purchase it. – Coordinator #14
We have freezers but we do not have refrigerators …
sometimes I’ll get like potatoes or onions that can sit at room
Lack of storage
temperature but I think our drawback … is related to space and
equipment
we only have the freezers. It would be really nice if we could try
to get some produce in there. – Coordinator #28
We’ve got to find a different way to get food from the Freestore
to us here, because we pick it up and we just don’t have a big
Limited
enough vehicle and we’re making too many trips and we’re
transportation
exhausting our people and the people that pick it up are elderly
capacity
and that’s a challenge … so where we are right now what we’re
doing, that’s our biggest challenge that’s what I would change.
– Coordinator #29
Strategies to Increase Food Item Availability at Food Pantries
While discussing the sources of food donation coordinators described
numerous strategies to increase the food items available at the food pantry, as
shown in the Table 12. Many pantries have established partnerships with local
grocery stores or others organize food/item drives and some of them provide
specific donation guidelines to donors.

36

Table 12. Strategies to obtain food donations
Themes
Quotes
The Kroger stores do in the area they have guidelines as far as
… how long they’ll keep something on a shelf … they have a
logistics person that processes it and takes it all from Kroger’s
inventory and you know, either destroys what needs to be
destroyed or sends back to the manufacturer what needs to be
sent back to the manufacturer and then the rest gets donated to
us and then we process it and give it away to the clients. –
Partner w/
Coordinator #16
local grocery
I think joining forces with the local stores, and in this case Meijer
stores
is great. You know if we can get all the stores to say Ok I’ll back
this pantry, I’ll back this pantry, not just with a donation … but
with a program like the Simply Give program of Meijer where …
people can make donations to you through the store and then
the store helps by matching out the funds, and then we have a
choice at that point because we can take the cards we get from
that program and go over and use them in the store. –
Coordinator #24
We contact the congregations and ask them to pick a month
that they would do a food drive to support the pantry, and …
then that month is theirs for the next year and the year after
that. So what they do during their month is we give them a
barrel that … shows a little thing what we need … whatever we
Provide
need at that time and we ask them to collect those items. At the
specific
end of the month they get a group together … they load their
donation
cars with the food that they collected, they come here to the
guidelines to
pantry and they unload.
donors
– Coordinator #12
We put out a newsletter and we put out a wish list every week
that goes to all of our community newsletters, it goes on our
website, it goes on our Facebook so people can see what we
call our needs this week, and so pretty much whatever we ask
for that’s what we’re getting in. – Coordinator #29
We do have a development team of like 3 people who actively
Seek out new
solicit new organizations to give us food and things like that, so
partnerships
yeah I mean it’s just a combination of long-standing
relationships and new solicitations. – Coordinator #41
While discussing sources of healthier food specifically, coordinators
described strategies that focused on increasing the availability of fresh produce.
These efforts involved targeting different donation sources than the strategies

37

previously identified to acquire all items. Table 13 below displays the strategies
coordinators described as effective in acquiring healthy foods.
Table 13. Strategies to increase availability of healthy foods
Themes
Quotes
I think it’s my individual preference, so it’s how I order, what I try
to bring in here for them. So I think it would be our individual
preference for our pantry. The decision that we make of how we
want to feed our clients and I like healthy so like I said if I can’t
Focused
eat it you can’t have it. So I'm not a junk food person, so our
efforts of
pantry, we stock it that way. – Coordinator #15
coordinator
When we go to the Freestore we actively search out the
acquire
produce and we’ll go through as much as we can to get any of
healthy foods
the fresh fruits or vegetables and we pick that up from Fresh
Market and from the Kroger store too. So I think we’re pretty
active as far as trying to get the healthier food items because
we know we have plenty of non-healthy food items [laughs]. –
Coordinator #29
We also are partnered with the Northside Farmer’s Market, so
every Wednesday the vendors give whatever they have left that
Partner with
they don’t want to take back, so we … get some of the best
farmer’s
produce in the city, it’s just been picked the day before that
markets and
morning. – Coordinator #21
local farmers
We have a farmer who farms in the summer time and he brings
us fresh produce and it’s directly from his farm into our pantry. –
Coordinator #37
The church that we’re next to has a garden and so we get some
of their produce … the produce that we get goes very quickly,
Partner with
clients really do enjoy getting fresh things for sure. –
local
Coordinator #27
community
Having the garden I think is our biggest thing toward that … We
gardens
just counted … over 1200 things have been given out, out of the
garden this year. – Coordinator #10
Even though several coordinators mentioned that they made efforts
to obtain healthy foods, others expressed their concern with making sure
to have sufficient amounts of food to distribute:
A lot of times you know you get whatever you get so we—and this
kind of sounds bad but you know sometimes we concentrate more
on quantity than you know what’s the healthiest. – Coordinator #25

38

Nutrition education at food pantries
Most food pantry coordinators reported that they have not offered any
nutrition education at their pantry (70.7%) and the most often reported resource
needs and barriers included lack of personnel with nutrition expertise (51.2%),
limited funding available (48.8%), and lack of client interest based on their
perception (41.5%) as shown in Table 14.
Table 14. Availability of nutrition education at food pantries
Measure
Frequency (%)
Nutrition education offered to
Clients
9 (22)
Pantry staff
2 (4.9)
Both
1 (2.4)
Neither
29 (70.7)
Needs/barriers to offering nutrition education at
food pantries
Limited funding available
20 (48.8)
Limited personnel with nutrition expertise
21 (51.2)
Limited space
10 (24.4)
Lack of client interest
17 (41.5)
Lack of pantry coordinator interest
5 (12.2)
Other
3 (7.3)
When coordinators were asked what efforts their pantry made to promote
healthy eating for their clients, some coordinators described interactive nutrition
education programs, while others described more informal information sharing
with their clients. The variety of efforts made by pantries is described in Table 15.

39

Table 15. Current efforts to promote healthy eating for clients
Themes
Quotes
When they come through the food pantry they actually talk with
the shopper about the benefits, the nutrition benefits of various
foods so that they can make better choices when they are
Informal
looking at each food group. – Coordinator #39
nutrition
This past year we had a lot of kale come in … well people would
information
go “well I don’t know what to do with that”, and so we talked
sharing
about you know vitamins and minerals in the fresh vegetables
and how much healthier it is, and so there’s a lot of interaction
back and forth about those kind of things. – Coordinator #29
The majority of my clients are … low-income and an eggplant
looks foreign to them, … what they know is collard greens, what
they know is okra, what they know is green beans, the basics,
anything beyond that is foreign … and so what I will do is what
Food sampling
different vegetable that I would bring in I would cook it some
form of way that I think it will be palatable for them and have
them taste it, and that’s how now I have people starting to eat
different vegetables. – Coordinator #32
We printed a cookbook for our clients last year based on only
items that we have in the pantry … So lots of soups and stews
and casseroles that are going to stretch their budget and feed
Providing
more people. … We put together bags sometimes, we’ll print
recipes
out a recipe for chicken fiesta soup and … it’s all grouped
together and the recipe is stapled on and just say look this is a
whole meal, all you have to do is combine these ingredients …
you’ve got a whole meal. – Coordinator #29
We have cooking classes and we … talk about nutrition, we talk
about how things go together and then we also do a class
Providing
based on pantry food and show them how they can … make
cooking
their food last and how they can supplement with their food
classes
stamps, with SNAP and make their food go further. –
Coordinator #12
Promoting
We encourage people to go to the Farmer’s market, so we tell
usage of
them “Well you can use your food stamps there” and then
farmer’s
there’s this double up program called Produce Perks so if you
markets
swipe $10 you actually get $20. – Coordinator #21
When asked about the pantry’s efforts to promote healthy eating, several
barriers to promoting healthy eating were identified as shown in Table 16: limited
by the availability of healthy foods to distribute, lack of space to offer services,
and limited client knowledge in regards to healthy eating and cooking practices.
40

Another frequently expressed concern was limited client interest in nutrition
education based on their previous experiences or perceptions. Regardless of
other resource needs, perceived low client interest level and examples of
previous low attendance were mentioned as a major challenge to providing
nutrition education at their food pantries.

41

Table 16. Barriers to promoting healthy eating
Themes

Limited
availability of
healthy foods

Limited client
knowledge/
cooking skills

Limited client
interest in
nutrition
education

Quotes
We’re so limited as to what we can actually offer them
nutritionally, we try to offer low-sodium items … but our budget
can only get so much and when you have the can that costs
$1.19 and the can that costs 49 cents and you have 600 people
coming in that month you can’t afford to buy this one that has
less sodium in it … We only have so much resource and so you
have to be very careful what you ask for from your donors. –
Coordinator #4
We have to make choices based off of haves versus what we
want. We would love to have more nutritionally healthy things
but it’s whatever gets donated and we would like to find a better
source of healthier food that is consistent. – Coordinator #12
We do find however that there is still a resistance to really
cooking; there is still a lot of just heating things up. Sometimes
it’s a matter of lack of ability, sometimes it’s a matter of lack of
interest, sometimes it’s simply they just don’t know what to do
with it. Like the guy that wanted to know, we had veal one day
somebody Kroger had donated an enormous amount of veal
and he said he didn't like fish… and so you know there’s a lot
more education that needs to be out there. – Coordinator #29
For 2 years we did these classes, we brought in you
know Ohio State Extension or the Nutrition Council or—
but we had maybe 6 or 8 people come … we already had
people here you know, but it just, it felt like it was just
reaching a small group. – Coordinator #21
I guess I just don’t see a lot of that I think, I mean a lot of
these people they know what they want, they know what
they like, they want to get in and get out as quickly as
possible, you know there’s some interaction and I think
they enjoy the interaction but I think for the most part
people come here to get the same thing they get every
month and be on their way, I don’t think they come here
specifically looking for guidance or advice on nutrition. –
Coordinator #41

42

Regardless of whether the pantry already offered nutrition education
services of promoted healthy eating in other ways, all coordinators expressed
interest in providing some form of nutrition education or healthy eating promotion
for their clients, as illustrated by this response:
Oh very, very interested in that like I said we’re sort of doing it in a
very amateur way [laughs] we’re basing it on … how we were
influenced in growing up and whether that is really the right way or
not, it would probably be nice to have extra support. – Coordinator
#39

The topics/forms that were commonly described by coordinators as the
most beneficial forms of nutrition education included: targeted nutrition and
health information, food sampling at the pantry, cooking classes, and education
through the volunteer-client interaction, as shown in Table 17.

43

Table 17. Most beneficial topics/forms of nutrition education
Themes
Quotes
I think especially with our population the diabetes and the high
blood pressure are such pervasive issues, like how do you eat
Targeted
and cook and buy to help with those issues. I think that’s one
nutrition and
huge area, cause I think it helps everybody and it’s even to
health
avoid becoming diabetic or you can before you have to go on
education
blood pressure medicine it can help make these changes. –
Coordinator #21
We had a garden … and because some of that [produce] was
foreign to our clients we handed out recipes and also I like to
cook some samples and have that out so when the clients come
Food
in they can taste something and they taste what we have and
Sampling
generally it’s produce related but you know if they can taste it
then they'll be more likely to take it, take it home and try it and if
we have recipes it’s even better. – Coordinator #12
Cooking healthy, economical cooking might be a far more
marketable approach than just healthy eating because folks are
not going to have the focus on the healthy nearly as much as
they have on the economy … that might work if the approach is
how to get more for less from your food dollar…. if you’re going
Cooking
to get somebody to change their shopping habits, they're going
classes
to need to actually see it happen, they're going to need to see a
bag of lentils turn into something that is edible, and then eat it
[laughs]. They're going to need a cooking class that walks them
through the entire process. Reading about it is not, I don’t
believe it’s going to be an effective way to change behavior. –
Coordinator #30
Sharing
If we had some just you know casually speaking to people
information
saying “Ok you can take this bag of rice and stretch it out for a
about nutrition whole week” … or how to do some cooking and stretch things
through
… I think if we did that while we were shopping with them and
volunteerhave some nutritional facts I think that would work better than
client
trying to get people to come in and take a little class. –
interaction
Coordinator #28
When coordinators were asked what resources they would need to
provide these services they described to their clients, the coordinators identified
several resources they would need. Space to offer a class or interact with clients
and nutrition/health information material for their clients were frequently
identified. In food pantries that had access to the space needed to offer nutrition
44

education services, trained nutrition education personnel was more commonly
identified, as shown in Table 18.
Table 18. Resources needed to provide nutrition education
Themes
Quotes
Space is always a concern because we don’t have a space to
do it in so we have to clear it with the church and make sure
Space
that we can use a room and you know do all that, so logistics is
probably the biggest issue for us. – Coordinator #4
I think if you gave them handouts … not all of them but I think
some of them would read them because I do think they're
interested in their health it’s just the circumstances they're in
Nutrition
just limits what they have access to but I think if you gave them
information
some pamphlets they would read them … I think if you gave
material
them some pamphlets or maybe also some food charts, that we
could post around that might also be of some use. –
Coordinator #35
I think it would be a good idea if someone would want to come
Trained
in and do it, we’re stretched to the max with that we do now. I
nutrition
don’t see it as being something that we could do without some
education
outside help or somebody else coming in to do it. – Coordinator
personnel
#6

45

DISCUSSION
The results of this study reveal that the majority of pantries are serving
their clients through choice distribution but availability of fresh produce and
healthier items, such as low fat or low sodium options, are limited as compared to
less healthy items. Even though the coordinators indicated they are interested in
providing nutrition education to their clients, only a limited number of food
pantries provided some form of nutrition education or established efforts to
promote healthy eating for their clients. This was likely due the barriers they
identified, such as limited availability of healthy foods at the pantry, limited client
interest in nutrition education, and limited client cooking or nutrition knowledge.
The coordinators identified trained nutrition education personnel, space, and
nutrition information material as resources needed to provide nutrition education
to their clients.
The majority of pantries in this study were operating under some degree of
choice distribution (76%), which is a positive indicator that the pantries and
clients are benefitting from inherently reduced waste and increased client
satisfaction and dignity of choice distribution as reported in previous
literature.32,40 This trend may be the consequence of the efforts of the Freestore
Foodbank to promote the choice distribution system, as Ohio Association of
Second Harvest Foodbanks and The Ohio State Extension recommended the
implementation of choice distribution throughout their network of food banks and
food pantries starting in 2011.32 Limited storage space and space to offer
additional services that were identified as barriers to improving distribution

46

systems and offering additional services are similar to the findings from previous
studies.13,32
The FSFB was reported as a primary supplier of food for food pantries
(72.1%), in average, food pantries most commonly had three partner
organizations. This finding is similar to the national trend, in which Feeding
America was found to provide on average 70% of food supplies to the more than
39,000 Feeding America network food pantries in the US.13 The coordinators’
strategies to acquire food items included providing specific requests to donors
(i.e. congregation donations or local food drives) and to establishing partnerships
with local organizations and grocery stores. This information is in agreement with
the Feeding America 2014 report that found that over 50% of the participating
pantries reported receiving food donations from their local churches/religious
congregations, government programs, local food drives, and local
merchants/farmers within the previous year.13 An initiative to establish
partnerships between food pantries and the grocery stores near their locations
(where available) was started by the Freestore Foodbank in 2013. These
connections benefit both parties, as they provide grocery stores with the
opportunity to support to their communities and reduce their disposal of products,
and they allow pantries to obtain food items they may not have been able to
access otherwise. Donation sources and the strategies utilized by each food
pantry were variable and may depend on factors such as local organization
availability, coordinator interest, and the space and storage capabilities of each
pantry.

47

The strategies to acquire healthy foods involved targeting sources of fresh
produce specifically. Several coordinators expressed that they personally made
concerted efforts when selecting items for distribution (i.e. from FSFB) to focus
on produce whenever possible. Other strategies included seeking out
partnerships with sources of fresh produce including, but these efforts varied
widely from pantry to pantry due to the unique connections and capacities each
coordinator had access to. These strategies are important because providing
food pantry clients with access to fresh produce represents one strategy that may
help address the underlying access issues that play a role in the trend of lowerincome households consuming smaller amounts of fruits and vegetables than
higher income households.5,23
The “healthier” items, namely fresh produce, low-sodium, reduced fat, and
whole-grain alternatives have lower availabilities in almost all cases than their
“less healthy” alternatives. The cause of this disparity may be due to a variety of
factors including differences in donations, storage capacity and capabilities, and
logistic challenges that these more perishable foods present. The items provided
to pantries through TEFAP are generally shelf-stable, non-perishable items
because of long transportation time and storage logistics reasons, additionally
there is some variation based on region and season.27
Among the challenges of providing fresh/perishable items at food pantries,
limited space and storage capability, particularly for fresh/perishable items was a
frequently reported issue. The majority of the coordinators indicated that they
were equipped with freezers for frozen items, but were less likely to have

48

refrigerators for fresh produce and dairy items. Large-scale refrigeration units can
be very costly, and the resource/funding limitations of many pantries made lack
of refrigeration units a common barrier to obtaining fresh/perishable items.
Resolving these storage-related issues may need to precede efforts to acquire
donations of fresh produce to ensure the food safety. One way around this issue
is to acquire these food items on the day of distribution, but the logistic challenge
of limited transportation capacity that pantry coordinators identified limits the
feasibility of this solution
Many of the coordinators indicated the need for nutrition education among
their client populations and often provided examples of observed limited client
knowledge in regards to nutrition and health. This finding is supported by
previous reports of low diet quality and nutrition-related knowledge in low-income
populations, highlighting the need to provide nutrition education in order to
improve nutrition-related behaviors and diet quality among this population.9,15,16,17
Although the availability of nutrition education was limited, the coordinator’s
interest and their perceived need for nutrition education may indicate the
potential for increased availability of nutrition education at food pantries if the
resources needed are addressed.
The findings from the survey and in-depth interview revealed that trained,
knowledgeable personnel in nutrition, funding, space, and nutrition education
materials were the major resources needed to provide nutrition education. The
space constraint that many pantries face is difficult to modify physically, but
partnering with nearby organizations may be one way to address the need for an

49

educational space. Educational nutrition information was another resource need
frequently mentioned, and some coordinators felt that distributing handouts may
reach a larger audience than offering educational classes due to their perceived
lack of client interest in attending nutrition education classes. Although printed
nutrition education material is generally lower cost, which may be appealing to
food pantries with limited resources, existing literature suggests that simply
providing general nutrition information has limited effectiveness in improving
nutrition-related behaviors and diet quality as compared to providing individually
customized information or active learning programs.35,41,42 Providing the
opportunity to learn via educational nutrition information as well as nutrition
education programs is important in order to reach the largest audience possible.
Another barrier to providing nutrition education identified was their
perception that the clients were not interested in nutrition and/or nutrition
education opportunities. These statements were based upon the low attendance
at previous nutrition education class offerings and their perception that some of
their clients express low priority for nutrition.
The coordinators often described a very close relationship with many of
their clients where health and wellness information was openly exchanged. This
interaction was reflected in their responses, as the coordinators often
incorporated the health issues they observed in their client populations,
specifically diabetes and high blood pressure, into the topics/forms of nutrition
education they believed would be most beneficial for their clients. Coordinators
indicated that interactive forms of nutrition education such as food sampling or

50

cooking classes where the clients gain exposure to foods and cooking methods
they may not have previously experienced would be particularly effective. These
sentiments are supported by previous literature that indicates the success of
nutrition education programs that focus on healthy cooking and improving fruit
and vegetable consumption among low-income populations and the limited
results that simple instruction and general information have on fruit and
vegetable consumption, regardless of income.15,41,42
There are several limitations of this study. The validity of the food
availability survey questions may be slightly affected due to a lack of
description/differentiation between “white” bread/flour and “wheat” bread/flour. In
addition after further examination of the items in many food pantries the “reduced
fat” options may not have been necessary for some food items such as baked
goods and snack items. During the survey and interview portion the coordinators
were not given definitions of the terms “healthy” or “nutrition education”, so their
responses were based upon how they individually interpreted these terms.
Consequently, some coordinators to described some activities that do not meet
the criteria for nutrition education.
This study also has several strengths. First the response rate among the
local food pantry coordinators was relatively high (63%), meaning that these
results are fairly representative of the food pantries in the Cincinnati area.
Second, the data collection period was relatively short; three months during fall,
so seasonal variability in the availability of produce items was limited. Additionally
during the coding process there was a high degree of agreement between the

51

individually coded transcripts, and all codes were discussed until a consensus
was reached.

52

CONCLUSION
The results of this study highlight the issue of lower availability of fresh,
perishable, and whole-grain food items as compared to their more-processed
and non-perishable alternatives at food pantries located in the Cincinnati area.
The coordinators also identified limited space and storage capabilities for
perishable foods. The findings also reveal the low availability of nutrition
education. While the coordinators expressed interest in providing access to
nutrition education, they also identified barriers to providing nutrition education
such as limited availability of healthy foods, perceived limited client interest, and
limited client nutrition and cooking knowledge. The resource needs identified to
provide nutrition education were space, trained nutrition education personnel and
nutrition information material.

53

IMPLICATIONS
The limited availability of fresh produce items highlights the need to
address the underlying issues that limit pantries from offering these food items.
Improving the storage capacity of food pantries as well as implementing effective
strategies to acquire donations of these items are key to making these items
more available. Future research and efforts are needed to identify reliable
sources of produce items as well as effective ways to improve storage
capabilities within food pantries. Discussion among local coordinators and
community partners may help address these issues.
The identified barriers and resource needs as well as ideas for targeted
nutrition education programs can provide guidance to increase the availability of
nutrition education at local food pantries. Initiating a meeting among local food
pantry coordinators, community partners, nutrition experts, and other
stakeholders may be the first step to address the low availability of nutrition
education at local food pantries. This conversation could lead to potential
collaboration and sharing of resources, particularly space for nutrition education
programs. In addition further research is needed to assess food pantry clients
interest in nutrition education and what format of nutrition education is preferred
and most beneficial for this population.

54

REFERENCES
1. Alisha Coleman-Jensen, Matthew P. Rabbitt, Christian Gregory, and Anita
Singh. Household Food Security in the United States in 2014, ERR-194, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, September 2015.
2. Coleman-Jensen A, Gregory C. Food Security in the US/ Definitions of Food
Security. Available at: http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutritionassistance/food-security-in-the-us/definitions-of-food-security.aspx#ranges.
Accessed 6/5, 2015.
3. Gundersen C, Engelhard E, Waxman E. Map the Meal Gap: Exploring Food
Insecurity at the Local Level. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy.
2014:ppu018.
4. Drewnowski A, Darmon N. The economics of obesity: dietary energy density
and energy cost. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;82:265S-273S.
5. Hilmers A, Hilmers DC, Dave J. Neighborhood disparities in access to healthy
foods and their effects on environmental justice. Am J Public Health.
2012;102:1644-1654.
6. Powell LM, Slater S, Mirtcheva D, Bao Y, Chaloupka FJ. Food store
availability and neighborhood characteristics in the United States. Prev Med.
2007;44:189-195
7. Powell LM, Chaloupka FJ, Bao Y. The availability of fast-food and full-service
restaurants in the United States: associations with neighborhood
characteristics. Am J Prev Med. 2007;33:S240-S245.
8. Rose D, Richards R. Food store access and household fruit and vegetable
use among participants in the US Food Stamp Program. Public Health Nutr.
2004;7:1081-1088.
9. Champagne CM, Casey PH, Connell CL, et al. Poverty and food intake in
rural America: diet quality is lower in food insecure adults in the Mississippi
Delta. J Am Diet Assoc. 2007;107:1886-1894.
10. Seligman HK, Laraia BA, Kushel MB. Food insecurity is associated with
chronic disease among low-income NHANES participants. J Nutr.
2010;140:304-310.
11. Robaina KA. Food Insecurity, Poor Diet Quality, and Obesity among Food
Pantry Participants in Hartford, CT. Journal of nutrition education and
behavior. 2013;45:159; 159-164; 164.
12. Pub. L. 98–8, title II, §  201A, as added Pub. L. 98–92, §  2(2), Sept. 2, 1983,
97 Stat. 608; amended Pub. L. 99–198, title XV, §  1563, Dec. 23, 1985, 99
Stat. 1590; Pub. L. 104–193, title VIII, §  871(a), Aug. 22, 1996, 110 Stat.
2343.
13. Feeding America. Hunger in America 2014. National Report. August. 2014.
14. Devine CM, Farrell TJ, Hartman R. Sisters in health: experiential program
emphasizing social interaction increases fruit and vegetable intake among
low-income adults. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior. 2005;37:265270.

55

15. Flynn MM, Reinert S, Schiff AR. A six-week cooking program of plant-based
recipes improves food security, body weight, and food purchases for food
pantry clients. Journal of hunger & environmental nutrition. 2013;8:73-84.
16. Dollahite J, Olson C, Scott-Pierce M. The impact of nutrition education on
food insecurity among low-income participants in EFNEP. Family and
Consumer Sciences Research Journal. 2003;32:127-139.
17. Eicher-Miller HA, Mason AC, Abbott AR, McCabe GP, Boushey CJ. The
effect of Food Stamp Nutrition Education on the food insecurity of low-income
women participants. Journal of nutrition education and behavior.
2009;41:161-168.
18. Wilde PE, Peterman JN. Individual weight change is associated with
household food security status. J Nutr. 2006;136:1395-1400.
19. Martin KS, Ferris AM. Food insecurity and gender are risk factors for
obesity. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior. 2007;39:31-36.
20. Franklin B, Jones A, Love D, Puckett S, Macklin J, White-Means S. Exploring
mediators of food insecurity and obesity: a review of recent literature. J
Community Health. 2012;37:253-264.
21. Blisard WN, Stewart H, Jolliffe D. Low-Income Households' Expenditures on
Fruits and Vegetables. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service Washington, DC; 2004.
22. Havas S, Treiman K, Langenberg P, et al. Factors associated with fruit and
vegetable consumption among women participating in WIC. J Am Diet Assoc.
1998;98:1141-1148.
23. Krebs-Smith SM, Heimendinger J, Patterson BH, Subar AF, Kessler R,
Pivonka E. Psychosocial factors associated with fruit and vegetable
consumption. American Journal of Health Promotion. 1995;10:98-104.
24. Turrell G, Kavanagh AM. Socio-economic pathways to diet: modelling the
association between socio-economic position and food purchasing
behaviour. Public Health Nutr. 2006;9:375-383.
25. Morland K, Wing S, Diez Roux A. The contextual effect of the local food
environment on residents' diets: the atherosclerosis risk in communities
study. Am J Public Health. 2002;92:1761-1767.
26. USDA Food and Nutrition Service. Food Distribution Programs. Available at:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/programs-and-services. Accessed 6/10, 2015.
27. USDA Foods Available for 2016 The Emergency Food Assistance Program.
Available at: http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/tefap/TEFAP-FoodsAvailable.pdf. Accessed 7/15, 2015.
28. Mabli J, Cohen R, Potter F, Zhao Z. Hunger in America 2010 National report
prepared for feeding America. 2010.
29. Gabe T. Poverty in the United States: 2013. 2014.
30. Wood DK, Shultz JA, Butkus SN, Ballejos ME. Patterns of food coping
strategies among food pantry clients. Journal of Hunger & Environmental
Nutrition. 2009;4:185-202
31. Carson F. Promoting Client Choice. How Food Pantries Can Most Effectively
Alleviate Hunger. Available at: http://www.hungercenter.org/wp-

56

content/uploads/2011/07/Promoting-Client-Choice-Carson.pdf. Accessed
12/18, 2014.
32. Ohio Association of Second Harvest Food Banks. Making the Switch A Guide
for Converting to a Client Choice Food Pantry. Available at:
http://www.tafb.org/documents/ChoicePantryGuide.pdf. Accessed 12/18,
2014.
33. Riverbend Food Bank. How to Run a Food Pantry. Available
at: http://www.riverbendfoodbank.org/docs/howtopantry.pdf. Accessed 12/18,
2014.
34. Martin KS, Wu R, Wolff M, Colantonio AG, Grady J. A novel food pantry
program: food security, self-sufficiency, and diet-quality outcomes. Am J Prev
Med. 2013;45:569-575.
35. Pomerleau J, Lock K, Knai C, McKee M. Interventions designed to increase
adult fruit and vegetable intake can be effective: a systematic review of the
literature. J Nutr. 2005;135:2486-2495.
36. Contento IR. Nutrition Education: Linking Research, Theory, and
Practice. Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2007.
37. Emmons KM, Stoddard AM, Fletcher R, et al. Cancer prevention among
working class, multiethnic adults: results of the healthy directions-health
centers study. Am J Public Health. 2005;95:1200-1205.
38. IBM Corp. Released 2013. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 22.0.
Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.
39. Choose MyPlate.gov. Available at: http://www.choosemyplate.gov/MyPlate.
Accessed 05/02, 2016.
40. Remley DT, Zubieta AC, Lambea MC, Quinonez HM, Taylor C. Spanish-and
English-speaking client perceptions of choice food pantries. Journal of
Hunger & Environmental Nutrition. 2010;5:120-128.
41. Inglis V, Ball K, Crawford D. Socioeconomic variations in women's diets: what
is the role of perceptions of the local food environment? J Epidemiol
Community Health. 2008;62:191-197.
42. Newby P. Examining energy density: comments on diet quality, dietary
advice, and the cost of healthful eating. J Am Diet Assoc. 2006;106:11661169.

57

