Population growth and genetic diversity dynamics of modeled conservation methodologies
for threatened plant species

by Yamini Kashimshetty
B.S., De La Salle University, 2007
M.S., University of Queensland, 2009

A Doctoral dissertation submitted to
The Department of Biological Sciences
University of Cincinnati
In partial fulfillment of the
Requirements of the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Biological Sciences

Committee Chair: Dr. Steven H. Rogstad

May 2016

Abstract
Tropical and temperate plant species in forests around the world are threatened by humaninduced land-use changes which produce various outcomes such as increased spread of invasive
species, habitat fragmentation, and alterations of community structure among others. These
factors can lower population sizes and genetic diversity levels of native plant species, making the
risk of extinction imminent. Methodologies to mitigate such effects can involve introducing
endangered plant species back to their native habitats either via in situ management of exploited
species, or ex situ conservation. To study such species conservation, highly-replicated predictive
computer modeling can be an inexpensive tool to suggest those scenarios that can better maintain
viable population sizes and genetic diversity levels over the long term, since field studies are less
feasible given the limited time and resources available.
I used a species-specific, spatially-explicit, individual-based computer program
(NEWGARDEN) capable of modeling and monitoring plant population growth and genetic
diversity patterns in simulated stands over time to comparatively model various restoration
methodologies for different threatened tree species. Specifically, I examined: 1) effective
reintroduction geometries of the American chestnut; 2) sustainable spatial deforestation patterns
for long-lived canopy tree species in tropical lowland rain forests (TLRFs); and 3) seed
collection strategies capable of maximizing the harvest of genetic variation from rare TLRF tree
species for use in developing ex situ rescue populations. These species conservation
methodologies were tested under differing offspring and pollen dispersal distances, as this lifehistory trait can affect the spatial distribution of allelic diversity in populations. Results indicate
that for reintroductions of the American chestnut, planting and stewarding a limited number of
individuals at least 100m in from the preserve border (for a preserve sized 500m x 500m) were

i

adequate in maximizing retention of founder genetic diversity, while planting at least 300m in
best promoted population growth, especially under more distant offspring and pollen dispersal.
With regards to sustainable deforestation practices for fragmented long-lived TLRF canopy tree
species, alterations to their gene dispersal kernels following fragmentation effectuated larger
variations in population recovery and genetic diversity retention than did alterations in spatial
deforestation patterns. More distant offspring and pollen dispersal improved population recovery
and allelic diversity retention in such situations, suggesting manual manipulations of propagules
as a practical restoration measure. For the ex situ genetic conservation of rare TLRF trees,
strategies that promoted the harvest of genetic diversity from the source population included:
collecting fewer seeds from a larger sample of trees from peripheral subdivided sampling regions
of the population, using a random pattern of collection compared to a nearest-neighbor
methodology, and collecting from species with more distant gene dispersal. Collectively, these
results demonstrate how gene dispersal attributes of target species can have interactive effects
with various spatial aspects of plant conservation methodologies in determining the overall
success of such efforts. Conservation project planning for threatened plant species would benefit
from greater availability of accurate information regarding life-history characteristics of target
species combined with predictive computer simulation modeling methods using tools such as
NEWGARDEN.

ii

iii

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my father and mother for always believing in me and supporting me in
acquiring the education I would need to move forward in this world. You really showed me the
importance of education and made it possible for me to study around the world. Thank you for
the stability you provided.
Thank you to my wonderful husband, Tobi. You are a stalwart of support, encouragement and
intelligent insight. Thank you for bearing with my endless practice presentations throughout the
years, and always believing in me. I am so lucky to have you in my life.
Thank you to my sister, Rohini, for helping and guiding me throughout all my college
applications, and listening to me when I needed support.
Thank you Dr. Rogstad for believing in me enough to take me on as a graduate student and
guiding and helping me develop over the years as a PhD student. You are a wonderful advisor
and person, and I am so very lucky to have you as a mentor. You have taught me so much, thank
you!
Thanks to all the wonderful fellow graduate students in Dr. Culley’s lab, where I spent all my
years as a graduate student, Sunitha, Susan, Megan, Alina, Allison, Ben, Rob. You were
wonderful to see and interact with in the lab every day and were very helpful and resourceful to
me as well, thank you!
Thank you Theresa Culley for allowing me to have my office space with your graduate students.
You were always very kind and helpful to me, and I greatly appreciate that. I feel lucky to have
had such an excellent work environment, thank you.

iv

Thank you Dr. Pelikan for writing such a useful program like NEWGARDEN that I could use
throughout my graduate work. You were always helpful to me when I had questions and always
had great insight into the projects, which I am very grateful for.
Thank you Dr. Conover for being a kind and wonderful human being and professor to TA for in
Flowering Plant Classification. I learnt so much about different plants from you and the times
spent being a Teaching Assistant for your class were among the best of my graduate school
experience.
Thank you to the members of my research advisory committee for providing me with guidance
on my research projects.
Thank you to all the wonderful women of the Biological Sciences office, Mary, Heather, Sandy
and Charmaine. You were always so nice and helpful to me, thank you!
Lastly, thank you to the Department of Biological Sciences at UC for accepting me into the PhD
program and allowing me to pursue my graduate studies.

v

Table of Contents
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………...……....i
Acknowledgements………………………………………………………………………….......iv
List of Figures………………………………………………………………..……………....…vii
List of Tables……………………………………………………………………………………xi
Chapter 1 – Introduction…………………………………………………………………............1
Chapter 2 – Founder placement and gene dispersal affect population growth and genetic
diversity in restoration plantings of American Chestnut………………....................9
Chapter 3 – Variable gene dispersal conditions and spatial deforestation patterns can
interact to affect tropical tree conservation outcomes…………………….…...…..38
Supplementary Figures and Tables for Chapter 3.....………………………………………..76
S1 Appendix – Supplementary Information for Chpater 3……….…………………………85
Chapter 4 – Effective seed harvesting strategies for the ex situ genetic diversity
conservation of rare tropical tree populations………………………….………......93
Supplementary Figures and Tables for Chapter 4………………………………………….135
S2 Appendix – Supplementary Information for Chapter 4…………………………...……140
Chapter 5 – Conclusion……………………………………………………………………......151
S3 Appendix – Example NEWGARDEN Input parameter files…………………………...158

vi

List of Figures
Chapter 2
Figure 1

Mean population sizes for each age of American chestnut populations founded at
differing diagonal inset distances. These comparative trials span 101 generations
at the basic offspring and pollen dispersal conditions (25% to and from each
frame respectively). See text for more details.

Figure 2

Mean number of founding alleles retained across 101 generations for trial
populations differing only in the distance to which founders were inset from a
preserve border (population sizes shown in Fig.1). For all of these trials, the
“basic” conditions of offspring and pollen dispersal distances were used (25% to
or from each frame respectively). See text for more details.

Figure 3

F values across 101 generations for trials differing only in founder inset distance.
These data are from the same trials depicted in Figures 1 and 2. “Basic” offspring
and pollen dispersal conditions were used in each trial (25% to or from each
frame respectively). See text for more details.

Figure 4

Mean population size differences for comparative trial populations differing as to
both founder inset distances (x-axis) and with greater or lower offspring and/or
pollen dispersal distances (indicated by different letters A through F) relative to
the “basic” dispersal conditions (see Table 2). Data points depict population size
for each trial at age 100 only. In the trial condition summaries to the right of the
graph, if a dispersal type (i.e., offspring versus pollen) is not mentioned, then
dispersal follows the basic conditions.

Figure 5

Change in mean number of founding alleles retained in NEWGARDEN
populations after 100 bouts of mating for trials depicted in Figure 4. Trial
conditions differed with regard to both founder inset distance and offspring and
pollen dispersal distances as indicated (see summaries for A through F to the right
of the graph). Connected data points show alleles retained under one set of trial
dispersal conditions when founders were placed at diagonally increasing distances
from the preserve corner (x-axis). See text for more details.

Figure 6

Changes in F values in populations after 100 bouts of mating (the same
populations shown in Figures 4 and 5). Trial conditions differed with regard to
both founder inset distance and offspring and pollen dispersal distances as
indicated (see summaries for A through F to the right of the graph). Connected
data points show F values under one set of trial dispersal conditions when
founders were placed at diagonally increasing distances from the preserve corner
(x-axis). See text for more details.
vii

Chapter 3
Figure 1

Spatial logging patterns showing 10% total deforestation of a 500 ha fragment (in
grey). Fragment is 2.23 km or 160 grid points on a side. Diagram is
approximately to scale. a = Corners, b = Road, c = Central Square, d = 4Squares,
e = 3Strips, f = Strip. Additionally, selective logging was also performed,
representing a 10% removal of only those individuals belonging to the highest age
classes.

Figure 2

Mean population growth in the entire fragment across 600 generations. Trials
varied in gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen) and spatial logging
patterns. Groups labelled A-I indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal
condition, with similar growth trajectories and endpoints. Labelled in groupdescending order of mean population size after 600 bouts of mating: Gene
dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ =
Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the
probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a
particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1
Fig. and S4 Table); A = NONP; B = NOEP; C = NOFP; D = EONP; E = EOEP; F
= EOFP; G, H, I = FONP, FOEP, FOFP. For a complete list of logging pattern
and gene dispersal condition for each trial above, see S1 Appendix.

Figure 3

Mean population size for the entire fragment after 600 bouts of mating. Trials
varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and
pollen). Groups labelled A-I indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal
condition in descending order of mean population size. Gene dispersal condition
is abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ =
Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the probability of offspring and/or
pollen being dispersed to, or being received from, a particular distance frame
relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4 Table). A =
NONP; B = NOEP; C = NOFP; D = EONP; E = EOEP; F = EOFP; G = FONP; H
= FOEP; I = FOFP. “Control” refers to un-logged fragment, and “Selective
Logging” refers to 10% removal of only those individuals belonging to the
highest age-classes.

Figure 4

Mean population size after 600 bouts of mating for recovery regions (all logged
areas combined). Trials varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal
conditions (offspring and pollen). Groups labelled A-I indicate trials grouped
according to gene dispersal condition in descending order of mean population
size: Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal,
‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the
probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a
particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1
viii

Fig. and S4 Table) A = NONP; B = NOEP; C = NOFP; D = EONP; E = EOEP; F
= EOFP; G = FONP; H = FOEP; I = FOFP. Control” refers to un-logged
fragment, and “Selective Logging” refers to 10% removal of only those
individuals belonging to the highest age classes.
Figure 5

Mean founding allele retention after 600 generations for recovery regions (all
logged areas combined). Trials varied in spatial logging patterns and gene
dispersal conditions (offspring and pollen). Groups labelled A-I indicate trials
grouped according to gene dispersal condition in descending order of mean
population size: Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near,
‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and
‘Far’ refer to the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being
received from a particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for
more detail see S1 Fig. and S4 Table): A = NOEP; B = NONP; C = NOFP; D =
EONP; E = EOEP; F = EOFP; G = FONP; H = FOEP; I = FOFP. “Control” refers
to un-logged fragment, and “Selective Logging” refers to 10% removal of only
those individuals belonging to the highest age class.

Figure 6

Mean Fit for trials across 600 bouts of mating in the entire fragment. Trials varied
in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen).
Groups labelled 1–4 indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition,
with similar growth trajectories and endpoints. In group descending order of mean
Fit levels: Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ =
Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to
the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received
from a particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail
S1 Fig. and S4 Table); 1 = FONP; 2 = EONP; EOFP; NOFP; NONP; 3 = FOEP,
EOEP, NOEP; 4 = FOFP. For a complete list of logging pattern and gene
dispersal condition for each trial above, see S1 Appendix.

ix

Chapter 4
Figure 1

Different Sampling locations: a) Border, b) 100m In, c) 500m In, and d) Center;
a-c are subdivided and d is contiguous.

Figure 2

Experimental design showing the different variables and treatments tested.

Figure 3

Number of alleles preserved across different Ratios of seeds collected/Plants
sampled (RSPs) grouped by Geometric pattern of collection, under Near gene
dispersal when sampling occurred at the Center. Each checkered bar represents
the path length traversed (scale to the right) for the trial just to the left of it (for
the Random and Neighbor patterns of collection only). Transect does not have
path length calculations (see Methods and S2 Appendix for details).

Figure 4

Number of alleles preserved across different Ratios of seeds collected/Plants
sampled (RSPs) grouped by Sampling location, under Near gene dispersal using
the Neighbor pattern of collection. Each checkered bar represents the path length
traversed (scale to the right) for the trial just to the left of it.

Figure 5

Number of alleles preserved across different Ratios of seeds collected/Plants
sampled (RSPs) grouped by Gene dispersal scenario, using the Neighbor pattern
of collection when sampling occurred at the Center.

Figure 6

Number of alleles preserved across different Sampling locations, using the
Random pattern of collection for Near gene dispersal. Each checkered bar
represents the path length traversed (scale to the right) for the trial just to the left
of it.

Figure 7

Path lengths traversed versus number of alleles preserved for sampling trials
conducted at the Center under Near gene dispersal, labeled with Ratio of seeds
collected/Plants sampled and Geometric pattern of collection (R = Random,
symbolized by clear circle, N = Neighbor, symbolized by black circle). Error
ranges may be too small to distinguish for some points on the graph.

x

List of Tables
Chapter 1
Table 1

Input Parameters Held Constant. User specified age-specific input conditions for
reproductive rate, pollen provisioning, and mortality used in all trials. Values not
given were interpolated between the bounding values. See text for more details.

Table 2

Percent offspring and pollen dispersed to or from each distance frame for
NEWGARDEN trials described further in the text. Trials were otherwise
identical.

xi

Chapter 1 - Introduction

Over the past century and continuing, forests worldwide have been facing intense anthropogenic
modifications as a result of increased population growth and industrialization, resulting in
extensive deforestation, forest fragmentation, and the spread of invasive species, among other
stressors (Owiny 2016; Lewis et al. 2015; Trumbore et al. 2015). Such forest alterations have in
some instances put native plant species at risk by lowering their population sizes to near
extinction, or in some cases causing the entire loss of certain species (Newbold et al. 2015).
Thus, there is an increasingly growing need to protect or rescue endangered plant populations, as
these are important components of forest biodiversity, provide essential ecosystem services and
supply the forest architecture, microclimate conditions and nutritional resources for other
organisms to exist upon (Shoo et al. 2016; Turner et al. 2016; Laurance et al. 1998; Gentry
1988).
Conservation projects for plant species can involve different types of in situ and ex situ
methodologies (Brown and Briggs, 1991). In situ appraoches involve developing measures to
protect species where they currently exist in their natural habitat. Ex situ methods, on the other
hand, can involve sampling for propagules from threatened plant populations for implementing
later reintroductions under reduced environmental pressures (Brancilion et al. 2013; Brown and
Briggs 1991). One of the main goals of conservation projects is to maintain viable population
growth and genetic diversity levels over the long-term to avoid the detrimental effects associated
with small population sizes and low allelic variation (Frankham et al. 2013; Ellstrand and Elam
1993). Small population sizes have been linked to issues such as increased genetic drift, Allee
effects, and higher population subdivision and inbreeding levels, collectively raising the risk of

1

extinction (Ottewell et al. 2016; Groom 1998). Genetically diverse populations have also been
found to better withstand future changing environmental pressures and demographic
stochasticity, and thus are more be able to sustain their evolutionary potential through time
(Fotinos et al. 2015; Frankham 2005).
One important example of a keystone tree species for which reintroduction efforts are
currently underway is the American chestnut, Castanea dentata [Marsh.] Borkh (Fagaceae), an
ecologically and economically important foundation species inhabiting the Eastern mesophytic
forests of North America, whose populations have been nearly extinguished over the past
hundred years due to attack by a fungal pathogen (Cryphonetrica parasitica) accidentally
imported on logs from East Asia in the late 19th century. Few trees of this species remain
throughout its native range, and most of these persist as sprouts from the root-collar of fallen
infected trees. Concerted efforts to reinstate the American chestnut have involved various
techniques including the genetic engineering of disease-resistant trees for later reintroductions
into its native habitat, controlling the spread of the fungus through the application of
mycoviruses or sub-virulent Cryphonetrica strains, as well as resistant back-cross breeding of
surviving disease-free trees with the resistant Chinese chestnut (Jacobs et al. 2012). As resistant
seeds become available through these efforts, they will have to be reintroduced throughout the
native range in a cost-effective manner as their generation is expensive. A previously
unexplored aspect of such reintroductions involves the spatial patterning of founder plantings,
which could be important to consider as characteristics such as offspring and pollen dispersal
have been found to affect the spatial pattern of seed aggregation, the spatial distribution of
populations, mating systems, density-dependent mortality and the spatial genetic structure of
populations (Yinegar et al. 2015; Marco et al. 2011; Zanella et al. 2011; Seidler and Plotkin

2

2006; Clark et al. 2005; Nathan and Muller-Landau 2000). Demonstrating, the existence of
favorable spatial patterns of reintroduction chestnut seed plantings that could not only maximize
population growth and allelic diversity (reintroduction projects that account for these factors
have been found to be more successful than those that do not; Fotinos et al. 2015; Frankham
2005), but also reduce costs associated with such endeavors (e.g., travelling into and out of the
preserve) would lead to improved restoration methods for this endangered tree.
One major example where sustainable in situ management of plant populations is
urgently required is that of deforestation in tropical lowland rain forests (TLRFs), where each
year an average of 1.2% of TLRFs are harvested around the world (Asner et al. 2009; Bradshaw
et al. 2008; Butler and Laurance 2008). Such deforestation creates isolated fragments of
differing sizes, which can further undergo various internal logging treatments. Such disturbance
regimens can engender changes to the dispersal kernels of logged plant populations by altering
the abundance and behavior of their offspring dispersers and pollinators (Martines-Garza &
Howe 2003). Could such alterations in spatially-explicit life-history traits interact with varying
spatial patterns of deforestation to bring about differential rates of recovery of the logged
populations? If so, could sustainable deforestation practices and/or dispersal regimens be
recommended that could better sustain population sizes and genetic variation levels over time?
Such conservation guidelines would be timely and helpful as deforestation activities are expected
to continue in order to meet the demands of burgeoning industrialization, especially in
developing nations (Butler and Laurance, 2008).
Ex situ rescue can replace in situ conservation which might not always be feasible due to
lack of infrastructure and monetary resources, deforestation activities; or abiotic pressures such
as climate change (Hoban and Schlarbaum 2014). This is especially appropriate for rare tropical

3

tree species (approximately one third of tree species in the Amazon are considered rare; Hubbell
et al. 2008) as their low population sizes and densities make them more susceptible to genetic
drift, inbreeding, and population subdivision, increasing the potential for extinction. As one of
the main goals in practicing ex situ conservation is to maximize the genetic diversity harvested
from the source population, could there be more efficient ways of collecting seeds that could
minimize conservation costs in addition to optimizing the capture of genetic variation? For
example, are there certain ratios of seeds collected to plants sampled, sampling locations within
the spatial distribution of the population, geometric patterns of harvesting, and partitioning of
sampling areas that could increase the amount of source population genetic variation harvested
while reducing the effort expended in terms of total path length traversed? Do species with
variable gene flow patterns have different ‘more optimized’ seed harvesting methodologies?
Such insights could be vital in the design and implementation of more efficient TLRF tree ex situ
seed collection strategies.
As genotypic variation seen among individuals within plant populations can be extensive,
a high level of experimental replication is crucial for providing accurate insights (Haymes and
Fox 2012). Experimental replication can be difficult in the field to derive statistically accurate
short- and long-term conclusions, due to the expenses of the logistics of such experiments,
especially when target species are already endangered (Tietjen and Huth, 2006; Alvarez-Buyalla
et al. 1996). In such cases, highly replicated predictive modeling can be a powerful technology
for simulating demographic trends in forest restoration (Vanclay, 2003; Pulliam and Dunning,
1995), and their population genetic dynamics. In this way more scientifically-informed
conservation methods can be developed.

4

In this thesis, I used an individual-based, species-specific, spatially-explicit computer
program (NEWGARDEN; Kashimshetty et al. 2015; Rogstad and Pelikan 2011) that models the
demographic and population genetic dynamics of plant populations through the simulation of
explicit life-history processes and spatial characteristics of the population, to: 1) examine
differing spatial patterns of reintroduction plantings of the American chestnut under varying
offspring and pollen dispersal distances to determine optimal reintroduction geometries that
would maximally preserve founder population sizes and genetic variation over the long-term
(Chapter 2; Kashimshetty et al. 2012); 2) ascertain the effects of variable spatial patterns of
deforestation on the population growth and genetic diversity of fragmented TLRF tree
populations under alternate offspring and pollen dispersal conditions following fragmentation
(Chapter 3; Kashimshetty et al. 2015); and 3) study varying aspects of seed collection trials for
ex situ plantings including: ratio of seeds collected/plants sampled; sampling location; geometric
partitioning and position of sampling areas; and gene dispersal distance) specifically for rare
tropical tree species to determine whether certain collection methods better maximize the harvest
of genetic diversity from the source population and reduce the associated costs of sampling in the
field (Chapter 4). I hypothesized that altering such variables in these simulations would lead to
differential responses in population growth and/or levels of genetic diversity retained in
populations or in the seed for ex situ collections, and in effort expended (for seed collection
trials), demonstrating that certain conservation methodologies can be more effective than others
in protecting plant species.

5

References
Asner G, Rudel T, Aide T, Defries R, Emerson R (2009) A contemporary assessment of change in
humid tropical forests. Conservation Biology. 23:1386-1395.
Alvarez-Buyalla E, Garcia-Barrios R, Moreno C, Martinez-Ramos M (1996) Demographic and
genetic models in conservation biology: Applications and perspectives for tropical rain forest tree
species. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 27:387-421.
Bradshaw C, Sodhi N, Brook B (2008) Tropical turmoil: a biodiversity tragedy in progress.
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 72:79-87.
Brancilion PH, Melo FP, Tabarelli M, Rodrigeus RR (2013) Biodiversity persistence in highly
human-modified tropical landscapes depends on ecological restoration. Tropical Conservation
Science. 6:705-710.
Brown AH, Briggs JD (1991) Sampling strategies for genetic variation in ex situ collections of
endangered plant species. In: Genetics and conservation of rare plants. Oxford Univ. Press, NY
pp 99-118.
Butler R, Laurance W (2008) New strategies for conserving tropical forests. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution. 23:469-472.
Ellstrand NC, Elam DR (1993) Population genetic consequences of small population size:
Implications for plant conservation. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 24: 217-242.
Frankham R, Bradshaw CJ, Brook BW (2013) Genetics in conservation management: Revised
recommendations for the 50/500 rules, Red List criteria and population viability analyses.
Biological Conservation. 170:56-63.
Frankham R (2005) Genetics and extinction. Biological conservation. 126:131-140.
Fotinos TD, Namoff S, Lewis C, Maschinski J, von Wettberg EJ, Griffith MP (2015) Genetic
evaluation of a reintroduction of Sargent’s Cherry Palm, Pseudophoenix sargentii. Journal of the
Torrey Botanical Society. 142: 000-000.
Gentry A (1988) Tree species richness of upper Amazonia forests. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 85:156-159
Groom MJ (1998) Allee effects limit population viability of an annual plant. The American
Naturalist. 151:487-496.
Haymes K, Fox G (2012) Variation among individuals in cone production in Pinus palustris
(Pinaceae). American Journal of Botany. 99:640-545.

6

Hoban S, Schlarbaum S (2014) Optimal sampling of seeds from plant populations for ex-situ
conservation of genetic biodiversity, considering realistic population structure. Biological
Conservation. 177: 90-99.
Jacobs DF, Dalgleish HJ, Nelson CD (2012) A conceptual framework for restoration of
threatened plants: the effective model of American chestnut (Castanea dentata) reintroduction.
New Phytologist. 197:378-393.
Kashimshetty Y, Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2015) Variable gene dispersal conditions and spatial
deforestation patterns can interact to affect tropical tree conservation outcomes. PLoS ONE
10(5): e0127745
Laurance W, Ferreira L, Merona R, Laurance S (1998) Rain forest fragmentation and the dynamics
of Amazonian tree communities. Ecology. 79:2032-2040.
Lewis SL, Edwards DP, Galbraith D (2015) Increasing human dominance in tropical forests.
Science. 349:827-832.
Marco DE, Montemurro MA, Cannas SA (2011) Comparing short and long-distance dispersal;
modelling and field case studies. Ecography. 34:671-682.
Martínez-Garza C, Howe HF (2003) Restoring tropical diversity: beating the time tax on species
loss. Journal of Applied Ecology. 40:423-429.
Newbold T, Hudson LN, Hill SL, Contu S, Lysenko I et al. (2015) Global effects of land use on
local terrestrial biodiversity. Nature. 520: 45-63.
Ottewell KM, Bickerton DC, Byrne M, Lowe AJ (2016) Bridging the gap: a genetic assessment
framework for population-level threatened plant conservation prioritization and decision-making.
Diversity and Distributions. 22:174-188.
Owiny, AA (2016) Communities of trees along a tropical forest restoration gradient. Russian
Journal of Ecology. 47:53-61.
Pulliam R, Dunning J (1995) Spatially explicit population models. Ecological Applications 5:2.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2011) Genetic diversity in establishing plant populations: Founder
number and geometry. Science Publishers, Enfield.
Shoo LP, Freebody K, Kanowski J, Catterall CP (2016) Slow recovery of tropical old-field
rainforest regrowth and the value and limitations of active restoration. Conservation Biology.
30:121-132.
Tietjen B, Huth A (2006) Modelling dynamics of managed tropical rainforests – An aggregated
approach. Ecological Modelling. 199:421-432

7

Trumbore S, Brando P, Hartmann H (2015) Forest health and global change. Science. 349:814818.
Turner GT, Anderson S, Gonzales-Chang M, Costanza R, Courville S et al. (2016) A review of
methods, data, and models to assess changes in the value of ecosystem services from land
degradation and restoration. Ecological Modelling. 319:190-207.
Vanclay J (2003) Realizing opportunities in forest growth modeling. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research. 33:536-541.

8

Chapter 2
Founder placement and gene dispersal affect population growth and genetic diversity in
restoration plantings of American Chestnut
(Kashimshetty Y, Simkins M, Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2012) Founder placement and gene dispersal affect
population growth and genetic diversity in restoration plantings of American chestnut. In: Caliskan M,
editor. Genetic Diversity in Plants. Shanghai: InTech Press. pp 375–390.)

Introduction

The American chestnut, Castanea dentata [Marsh.] Borkh (Fagaceae), was an abundant canopy
tree inhabiting the mixed mesophytic forests of eastern North America. The species was struck
by a fungal pathogen (Cryphonectria parasitica [Murrill] Barr) introduced from East Asia in the
late 1800’s on imported Asian chestnut material with the consequence that billions of trees have
been destroyed (Barakat et al. 2009; Elliot and Swank 2008; Jacobs 2007; Pierson et al. 2007;
Stilwell et al. 2003; Paillet 2002; Huang et al. 1998; Russel 1987). The near elimination of this
once important species has had widespread effects on the ecological functioning of eastern North
American forests, and has also had a severe impact on economic forest extraction practices (e.g.,
strong workable lumber; chestnuts as food and forage). Castanea dentata has escaped complete
elimination from its native range by persisting as occasional sprouts from the root collar of trees
damaged by the blight; these sprouts rarely reach full sexual maturity (Jacobs 2007; Stilwell et
al.2003; Paillet 2002). Efforts are underway to restore this former keystone species and prevent
extinction, reestablishing its ecological and economic roles in its natural habitat. Breeding of
blight-resistant strains is being attempted (e.g., by the American Chestnut Foundation, TACF)
through a series of initial hybridizations between C. dentata and the Chinese chestnut (C.
mollisima Blume), followed by a series of backcrosses with the American chestnut always
9

selecting for blight-resistance, to develop strains that are predominantly American chestnut in
genotypic constitution but which retain Chinese blight resistance genes. For example, some of
the most recent blight-resistant strains ready for reintroduction are calculated to be genetically
94% American chestnut and 6% Chinese chestnut (Jacbos 2007; Diskin et al. 2006).
The conservation of endangered plant species often involves restoring these species back
to their natural habitats and/or ex situ rescue plantings (Merritt and Dixon 2011), and the
American chestnut is no exception. Considerable resources are being expended in generating
blight-resistant strains of C. dentata, thus necessitating optimization of restoration programs
which are usually labor-intensive and expensive. Costs of such restoration efforts include
propagule generation and collection, storage, treatment, site preparation, planting, protecting,
provisioning, travelling to and from the introduction site, monitoring, and future manipulations
of individuals (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011).
One approach to optimizing restoration of the American chestnut is to use computer
programs to model the population growth and genetic effects of restoring plant populations in
different ways. While restoration programs have been widely undertaken for a number of plant
species, we lack the tools to analyze how factors like founder number and geometry of placement
within a restoration habitat interact with varying founder or species life history characteristics,
and whether these factors impact resultant population growth rates and preservation of genetic
diversity. While ecological edge effects have been documented as being evident at the borders
and edges of restoration preserves due to altered microenvironments in terms of wind-speeds,
light availability and organismal composition among other factors (Primack 2010), less is known
about whether placement of founders at varying distances from the preserve edge impacts the
population dynamics and genetic diversity measures of establishing populations. Further, can

10

differing founder placement patterns interact with other life-history characteristics such as pollen
and offspring dispersal distances to bring about different population growth rates and genetic
diversity levels? Exploring these potential demographic and genetic edge effects in the field with
C. dentata would not be feasible due to the costs associated with carrying out such experiments
on a wide-scale to ensure statistical reliability of data, especially since blight-resistant
individuals are expensive and time-consuming to produce, and thus must be used judiciously. In
this case modeling virtual populations through computer simulations represents a more tractable
alternative to field experiments, potentially providing valuable insight for restoration managers
on how best to re-introduce the American chestnut into preserves.
In this study, the computer program NEWGARDEN (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011) was
used to model blight-resistant American chestnut population restoration in a virtual preserve to
explore the population growth and genetic effects of placing founders at different distances from
preserve borders under differing patterns of gene dispersal. Our null hypothesis is: Varying
American chestnut founder placement at various diagonal distances from the preserve border,
while altering offspring and pollen dispersal distances, will have no effect on population growth
rates or retention of founding genetic diversity. We used comparative trials to examine the
degree to which some patterns of introduction might be preferable over others.

Methods

We used NEWGARDEN to model the population growth and genetic diversity of newly
establishing chestnut populations. This program simulates natural population development based
on a set of user-specified initial input conditions (Rogstad and Pelikan, 2011). One set of input

11

conditions constitutes a “trial” and input between trials may vary as to founder number and
geometric patterning, preserve characteristics, and with regard to various life history
characteristics (see below). For each age (bout of mating with mates chosen randomly as
conditioned by the input) of the developing population, NEWGARDEN provides output statistics
(for each new cohort and for the entire population; only the latter are given here) concerning the
population size, the number of founding alleles retained, heterozygosity (observed and expected),
and Fit (a measure reflecting deviation from Hardy-Weinberg expectations due to subdivision
and/or inbreeding; hereafter referred to as F value). For each set of input trial conditions, the user
can specify the number of replicate runs of those conditions to be used to calculate a mean and
standard deviation for each of the listed output statistics. The user can thus compare whether
means of statistics differ for populations of contrasting trials that differ in one or more input
conditions.

Input parameters held constant

The input parameters common to all experimental runs are described following their order in the
NEWGARDEN input file. These constant input parameters are based on population development
data obtained from the only known chestnut restoration stand which is naturally developing at
West Salem, Wisconsin (for details, see Rogstad and Pelikan 2011; Pierson et al. 2007).

The preserve grid system
Populations for all trials develop on a Cartesian grid system defined by the user. Individuals can
only establish on grid points, the spacing of which represents the average minimum distance that

12

can exist between reproductive trees. In our simulations, the grid system represents a restoration
preserve (a 5 km x 5 km square), comprising a 1000 x 1000 grid point system with 5 m between
grid points. This simple model represents an approximate average minimum distance spacing
needed between two reproductive trees based on a mature chestnut community at the carrying
capacity.

Loci and allelic variation
The ideal, non-inbred source population for the founders was set to have 30 loci per founder,
each with 100 alleles of equal frequency (frequency = 0.01 per allele). NEWGARDEN randomly
draws two alleles for each locus from the source population when creating a founder’s genotype.
In each new generation, every individual was censused for its allelic status at each of the 30 loci
to generate the genetic diversity output statistics.

Mating system
All individuals are bisexual with 100% outcrossing.

Offspring production
The age-specific reproduction rate (r) specified in all input files (based on population
development at West Salem) was held constant as shown in Table 1. In the intermediate years
not defined, the rate of offspring production is linearly interpolated between the bounding age
values. An established offspring does not reach reproductive age until its eighth year (Table 1).
Offspring production is distributed across eligible reproducing individuals according to a Poisson
distribution. As in natural settings, reproductive individuals may create multiple offspring, but all

13

of these may not establish into saplings. Offspring counted in a generation’s reproduction rate
are potential recruits for establishment and growth at a grid point. The number of such potential
recruits does not indicate the exact size of the newly established cohort for any particular age in
one bout of mating. See mortality for ways in which potential offspring “die” or fail to establish
in NEWGARDEN.

Age-specific pollen rate
For established individuals, the relative rate of serving as an eligible pollen donor that
contributes pollen to a given mating is conditioned by its age according to Table 1. Pollen
production is proportional relative to the highest value in the input. For the ages that are not
specified by the input values, the pollen rate is linearly interpolated. Once NEWGARDEN
selects an age-class and distance class (see below) for the pollen donor, one donor is chosen at
random for a particular mating from the pool of eligible potential donors.

Mortality
Individuals can “die” in a number of different ways during a trial run. Death means that the
individual is removed from the grid system and from further population processes and analyses.
If the offspring is distributed outside of the defined preserve grid system, it automatically dies.
An offspring will die in the event that it lands on a grid point that is already occupied by an
individual that will survive to the next generation. When an ovule isn’t pollinated since an
eligible pollen donor is not within the range of the ovule producer, this counts as a reproductive
event followed by immediate death of the potential offspring. If two or more offspring land at
the same grid point, one is randomly chosen as the survivor with others deleted. Death of

14

individuals is also age-dependent as specifiable by the user. For all trials here, age-specific
probabilities of dying are given in Table 1. Ages without a specified risk of death are linearly
interpolated between bounding values. In our trials, founders reach age 114, so there is a
probability that several founders are still alive by the end of the trial run.

Initial population
Aging of the population begins with the founders and it will continue to age until the specified
number of generations is completed. 169 founders, this being approximately the minimum
number of founders needed to capture > 95% of the source population alleles (Lawrence et al.,
1995; Chakraborty, 1993), of initial age 13 were used with founders located every other grid
point in a 13 x 13 individual square (26 x 26 grid points). This simulates a 10 m distance
between founders in a planting square 130 m on each side. This square of founders remained
constant across all trials, although it was moved to different distances from the preserve borders.

Generations
Beginning with the founders, 100 bouts of reproduction (101 generations or ages including the
founding generation) were conducted for each set of trial conditions. Output results in
Figures 1 to 3 are reported for the entire population at each age. For the pollen and offspring
dispersal distance comparison trials (Figures 4 to 6) only the results at the terminal age 100 are
given.

Replicate runs

15

The output values reported are mean values calculated from 40 replicate runs for each set of trial
input conditions. When trials are said to differ, we mean that reported generation mean values
differ significantly (p value < 0.05) unless otherwise stated. This convention is used rather than
reporting each standard deviation and t-test results for all trial comparisons.

Variable input parameters

Region and founder placement
In the first series of comparative trials, the square of 169 founders was placed at increasing
diagonal distances from the preserve border beginning with the founders at the lower left corner
(trial a). Seed and pollen dispersal distances were held constant at 25% to or from each distance
frame (see below) in this initial series. In a subsequent series of trials, the constant-sized founder
square was likewise moved diagonally toward the center of the preserve while offspring and
pollen dispersal distances differed in various combinations (Table 2).

Offspring dispersal distribution
Offspring dispersal on the grid system is based on a nested series of limiting frames called
“distance frames”. When an offspring is dispersed to a particular distance frame based on given
probabilities, the lower and upper values of each frame define the limits of dispersal. For a given
dispersal event, one point within the selected distance frame is chosen at random. The limits of
the four frames used in our trials and their varying respective dispersal probabilities across trials
are described in Table 2. In the “Basic Conditions” trials, offspring establishment was evenly
divided to the four distance frames with 25% probability of dispersal to each frame.

16

Modifications to the “basic” trial conditions to create alternate comparative trials are detailed in
Table 2. We use the summary phrase “Offspring less distant” to indicate restricted offspring
dispersal (compared to the “Basic Conditions” trials) within 65 m of the parent (13 grid points),
whereas in “Offspring least distant” trials, the majority of offspring dispersal was within 30 m (6
grid points) of the parent plant. The summary phrase “Offspring more distant” is used for the
trials in which the greatest percentage of offspring were dispersed between distances 110 m to
1500m (22 to 300 grid points) from the parent plant (Nathan et al. 2008; Jansen et al. 2008).

Pollen transport distances
The “Basic Conditions” and “Offspring less/least/more distant” trials had equal probability of
pollen dispersal from within each of the four distance frames (Table 2). Trial E has 90% of
pollen dispersal limited to from within a 30 m frame of the producing individual. Trial F has
90% of pollen dispersed from 110 m to 1500 m (22 to 300 grid points) from the parent plant.

Output

Based on population characteristics developing from the initial input specifications,
NEWGARDEN provides means for four statistical measures reported here: population size,
mean number of founding alleles retained, observed heterozygosity, and Fit (or F value)
calculated as: Fit = 1 – Hob / Hex, where Hob equals observed heterozygosity (based on actual
counts of heterozygous loci across all loci for all the individuals in the population) and Hex
equals the Hardy-Weinberg expected heterozygosity based on the allele frequencies across all
loci in the entire population. In general, Fit increases as inbreeding and/or subdivision increase in

17

the population and Fit = 0 in the absence of inbreeding. For the first series of trials (Figures 1
through 3) mean output values are reported for the total number of individuals in the population
at the end of each age. For the second series of trials (Figures 4 through 6), values are given only
for the total population after 100 bouts of mating.

Results

Under the “basic” conditions of offspring and pollen dispersal (25% to or from each frame
respectively; see Table 2), mean population size increased with increasing diagonal distance of
the standard square of 169 founders from the preserve corner (Fig. 1). At age 100, founders
situated at the corner (trial a) had the lowest mean population size (2,018 individuals), while the
equally highest mean population sizes (approximately 7,000) were attained by populations with
founders inset by 300, 400 and 500 grid points from the corner (trials d, e, and f, respectively).
Even an inset distance of 100 grid points (ca. 500 m; trial b) increased the mean population size
by 148%, compared to founders placed at the corner. The percent gain in population increase per
unit inset distance declines as the inset distances increases beyond 100 grid points, only
increasing by approximately 21% when inset distances increases from 100 to 200 grid points,
and approximately 13% when inset distances increase from 200 to 300 grid points. Beyond 300
grid points the rise in mean population size was not statistically different. Figure 2 shows the
mean number of founding alleles retained across 101 generations for the trials depicted in Figure
1. In the source population, 3000 alleles each at frequency of 0.01, were available for the
founding population. Drawing 169 founders, approximately 2900 alleles were present at
founding (97% of the source population alleles; Fig. 2). For example, imagine a restoration

18

project where 1,690 trees are planted with 90% attrition prior to reproduction (e.g., Primack and
Miao 1992). On average such a population would have approximately 97% of the alleles in the
original source population. NEWGARDEN can be used to estimate founding population sizes
needed given the effects of attrition, to provide target numbers of individuals for establishing
new populations or supplementation as needed.
For all populations, the number of alleles retained declined through generations, with
populations founded at greater inset distances retaining higher numbers of alleles (Fig. 2). The
169 founders were all aged 13 at the beginning of the trials, and given the mortality rate of 2%
per generation (Table 1), approximately 22 founders should remain in populations after 100
bouts of mating. This suggests that a significant proportion of the total founding alleles
remaining in the population at age 100 are carried by the descendents of founders that have died.
After 100 bouts of mating, there was approximately a 6% decline in number of founding
alleles retained for populations inset at least 100 grid points or more (trials b, c, d, e and f),
compared to the 9.6% decline seen for populations situated at the corner (trial a). At year 100,
placing the founders 100 or more grid units inward from the corner produced a 3.8% (at the least;
trials b through e) increase in alleles retained compared to placing the founders at the corner
(trial a). The differences between various inset distances from 100 to 500 grid points (trials b
through f) were not statistically different (although notice the trend). Variations of inset
distances under basic dispersal conditions did not have significant or biologically meaningful
effects on observed heterozygosity levels (ranging from 0.97 to 0.99) across generations, at basic
dispersal conditions (data not shown).
There was little population subdivision and inbreeding observed across generations under
basic dispersal conditions as founders were placed at greater inset distances (Fig. 3). At year 100,

19

F values increased slightly across generations, with the highest F values (almost 0.02) being
reached by founders inset the furthest (by 500 grid points; trial f). F values tended to be lower for
decreasing inset distances (e.g., trials a and b) at year 100. Although all trials are increasing in F,
only by increasing the number of generations could it be determined the degree to which F
values might become important (e.g., approach 0.05) in future generations.
Next, we ran a series of comparative trials varying not only in the inset distance of the
square of 169 founders, but also altering the offspring and pollen dispersal conditions relative to
the basic conditions (25% to or from each frame respectively) used in the trials just reviewed in
Figures 1 through 3. We conducted this next trial series to investigate how differing types of
gene dispersal might interact with founder distance from a border to affect population growth
and genetic diversity.
Figure 4 shows population growth results (at population age 100 only) from these trials
when both inset distances and dispersal conditions were varied. Trends observed here included
increasing mean population sizes as inset distances increased from the corner to 500 grid points
for population D, up to 400 grid points (E), up to 300 grid points (A), and up to 100 grid points
(B, C, and F). For populations B, C and F, increasing founder inset distance to 100 grid points
from the corner raised mean population size significantly. However beyond 100 grid points,
population sizes remained more or less constant across further increase in inset distances. If
actual dispersal patterns match those in trials B, C, or F, a restoration manager will not gain
higher rates of population growth by planting founders beyond 100 m into the preserve. Relative
to the “basic” dispersal conditions trials just discussed in Figures 1 through 3 (trials marked A in
Fig. 4), altering offspring and pollen dispersal distances caused various but pronounced
differences in rates of population growth. Trial D, with only the offspring dispersing to greater

20

distances, was the only trial that exceeded trial A (“basic” conditions) at founder inset distances
greater than 100 grid points. Trial D showed the greatest overall population growth compared to
all trials at those inset distances.
For each set of trial conditions (A through F) the greatest allele loss occurred when
founders were placed at the preserve corner (Fig. 5). More alleles were retained under otherwise
constant trial conditions when founders were inset only 100 grid points although even further
inset distances caused no further major increases in allele retention for trial conditions A, B, C,
and F, while inset distances of 300 grid points were needed to maximize allele retention for trial
conditions D and E. Considering all of these trial conditions, the greatest difference in the mean
number of founding alleles retained is between trial E at the corner and trial D at 400 grid points
(a 10.9% difference).
Observed heterozygosity values for all trials after 100 mating bouts did not vary by a
large amount (ranging from 0.967 to 0.980), showing only a 1.3% difference between the highest
and lowest values. At generation 100 there was little population subdivision and inbreeding seen
across trials with differing founder inset distances and various dispersal conditions (Fig. 6). The
highest F values were seen for populations under basic dispersal conditions (trial conditions A),
followed by populations with offspring being dispersed less distantly (trial conditions B and C).
Populations tended to have slightly greater F values at inset distances beyond 100 grid points,
except for trial D, where offspring were more distantly dispersed (80% to the last frame) and trial
F, where pollen was more distantly dispersed and offspring least distantly dispersed (80% from
the last frame and 90% to the first frame, respectively).

21

Discussion

Practical applications

The null hypothesis that placing founders at differing distances from the edge of a restoration
preserve will have no effect on subsequent population growth or genetic diversity was falsified
according to results involving the first series trials with the basic dispersal conditions only (Figs
1 through 3). These results confirm that populations can manifest different degrees of population
growth and genetic edge effects (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011) depending on the distance of
founders from preserve borders. In terms of population development, increases in growth rates
were correlated with increasing distances of founder placement from a border up to a point: with
the “basic” gene dispersal distances, planting founders 300 grid points (1500 m) into the preserve
is as good as planting them 500 grid points (2500 m) into a 5 km x 5 km or larger preserve.
Increasing founder placement up to 300 grid points increasingly allows founders a greater
number of viable grid points to establish their offspring thereby reducing mortality levels. As for
genetic diversity, the greatest loss of alleles occurred when founders were placed less than 100
grid units from the border (trial a, Fig. 2). However, even at the corner, losses were not
considerably greater than placing the founders 100 grid points into the preserve (corner trial a
retained 90.4% while trial b retained 93.9% of the founding alleles). A preserve manager not
interested in maximizing population growth but who only wants to maximize genetic diversity
retention could thus plant the founders 100 grid points (500 m) into a 5 km x 5 km or larger
preserve. Beyond that, planting further into the preserve does not significantly increase the

22

number of founding alleles conserved. Differences in losses of genetic diversity as indicated by
changes in observed heterozygosity or F values were not pronounced at age 100 among these
trials, and thus are not of major concern to a restoration manager through the initial
establishment period modeled.
The second series of trials in which offspring and pollen movement distances were varied
in populations with founders placed at increasing distances from the border (Figs 4 through
6) demonstrate that population and genetic edge effects are further affected by variations in gene
dispersal distances. Compared to the basic conditions used in Figures 1 through 3, population
growth was increasingly reduced (Fig. 4) when pollen dispersal was more restricted and
offspring dispersal was more distant (trial E), when offspring dispersal was less distant but
pollen dispersal matched the basic conditions (trial B), when pollen dispersal was more distant
and offspring dispersal less distant (trial F), and when offspring dispersal was most restricted but
pollen dispersal matched the basic conditions (trial C). Only when offspring establishment was
more distant but pollen dispersal matched the basic conditions (trial D) did population growth
exceed that exhibited when the basic dispersal condition applied (trial A). These results suggest
that in restoration projects with conditions similar to those simulated here, large gains in
population growth might be promoted by ensuring that more offspring establish at greater
distances than are occurring naturally.
Differences in founding allele retention among this second series of trials were also
evident (Fig. 5), with the greatest retention in alleles being under the basic and offspring more
distant dispersal conditions (trials A and D respectively). For trial conditions A, B, C, and F,
there was a sharp increase in allele retention by moving founders from the corner inwards

23

100 m, after which further gains were not as pronounced to various degrees for different trial
conditions at increasing distances. Under trial conditions E and D, placing founders at
300 grid points would be preferable since significant gains in allele retention were not had
beyond that distance. Across all of these trials, the greatest difference in allele retention was
9.6% (between trial E founders at the corner and trial D founders inset by 400 grid points).
Inbreeding and subdivision appear to attain the highest values under the basic dispersal
conditions with founders inset into the preserve (Fig. 6), although none of the values are yet
approaching pronounced levels. Causes driving the minor differences seen in F values among
trials are not always readily interpretable (e.g., note trials E versus F versus C).
Overall, the relationships among trial conditions, inset distance, population growth,
genetic diversity retention, and inbreeding/subdivision can be complex and are not necessarily
intuitive. Given this complexity, NEWGARDEN modeling can be used to suggest restoration
management strategies. As noted earlier, restoration programs and management need to be as
cost-efficient as possible. By understanding interactions between life-history characteristics of C.
dentata and inset distance for founder establishment, program managers can estimate the best
methods to minimize such costs. For example, results of this study suggest that planting and
stewarding a limited number of founders (thousands at one location are not needed) at least 1500
m into a preserve and promoting successful offspring establishment beyond that which is
occurring naturally, rather than expending that effort promoting establishment within the
developing stand, is less costly and potentially more successful in terms of ease of population
establishment and growth, maintenance, as well as retention of genetic diversity and avoidance
of inbreeding and subdivision compared to other options. Managers may have to make costbenefit decisions such as which is more important: saving funds by planting near a border,

24

maintaining genetic diversity at the sacrifice of maximizing population growth, or planting
further into a preserve at greater expense. The results here stress the need for accurate knowledge
of realized gene dispersal attributes (and of other life history attributes) in any modeling-derived
restoration management planning. Lacking such information, restoration managers should
preferably take the most conservative approach to restoration using as accurate estimations of
life history characteristics as possible, in this case, planting the founders at least 1500 m from a
border.

Evolutionary implications

Natural populations establish with varying numbers of founders (often low numbers), degrees of
isolation, and geometry of founding. Inter-population and interspecific life history variation
compound the complexity of establishment events as indicated in trials here. The results above
suggest that these factors can interact differentially among newly founded populations, and that
even seemingly slight differences in initial conditions (e.g., just 500 m difference in founder
placement) may have significant effects on the future trajectories of population growth and
genetic diversity measures. NEWGARDEN can be used to explore this variation in theoretical
and existing situations.

Further considerations

We emphasize that the results reported here were generated with a subset of the potential input
conditions including constant input parameter values designed to simulate population

25

development in the only known restoration population of chestnuts, the West Salem stand
(Rogstad and Pelikan 2011). However, conditions at other restoration sites will surely differ
(e.g., density of competitors and rates-distances of establishment, age-specific offspring and
pollen production, age-specific mortality rates, gene dispersal distances, etc.). Further, other
species will often have drastically different conditions from those modeled here (e.g., short lived
perennials or annuals, different densities, different gene dispersal patterns). Finally, the
ecological niche will vary across species in ways that might affect geometric patterning (e.g., the
section of a forest the species naturally inhabits: one species that would typically be found living
on the outer regions of a forest would have different life history characteristics than a species that
would inhabit the center part of that forest). NEWGARDEN can be used to explore such intraand interspecific differences in the conditions of population establishment and development.
Previous studies (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011) have indicated that differences in the
geometric placement of founders (e.g., spacing between individuals; arranged in lines versus
squares; founder subdivision into a series of smaller squares) can affect rates of population
growth and genetic diversity maintenance. When planting a founding population, the simplest
pattern is to plant trees in straight lines to make rectangular or square founder areas. In our
experiments, the founders were established in a 13 x 13 square of individuals to be easily
manipulated for each trial of varying inset distances. This square shape only allowed for one
offspring to establish within the founding square between founding parents, which may not allow
for higher rates of population growth in the first few years of reproduction if the offspring have
limited dispersal. One question not addressed in our trials was whether or not varying geometry
of founder establishment patterns (e.g., completely random founder locations, X-shaped lines,
various straight lines, circles, or hollow squares) would affect population growth and genetic

26

diversity. Different establishment patterns may allow for a greater number of offspring to land in
unoccupied grid points than in the square pattern used in the above trials, and possibly reduce the
loss of genetic diversity. It is also possible that the geometric pattern of the founder
establishment interacting with the inset distance would affect the overall population growth and
maintenance of genetic diversity. Trial comparisons where geometry is varied in combination
with distance from edges and dispersal distances are underway.
For the above trials, 169 founders were used based on previous studies (Lawrence et al.
1995; Chakraborty 1993) that suggest a minimum of approximately 172 founders is needed to
capture the greatest majority of alleles from the source population while also minimizing
reintroduction costs in restoration projects. NEWGARDEN could be used to further investigate
what would be the minimal number of founders needed to minimize allele loss over generations
under a range of conditions.
Since it is not possible to investigate differences in all input conditions a priori,
NEWGARDEN modeling can also be used a posteriori to generate simulated populations
reflecting conditions and population growth outcomes for stands that have already been
established. Such simulations can then be used to evaluate the degree to which population
growth and genetic diversity preservation could be improved by supplementations or
manipulations of actual populations (e.g., planting more individuals, altering gene exchange
distances via increased seed distribution, reducing mortality rates at certain life stages, etc.).
If the restoration program includes harvesting offspring to redistribute within the preserve or at
new locations, where should the offspring be collected from? Samples could be taken in the
immediate area surrounding the entire founding population. However, this might not be optimal
due to travel distance into the preserve. It would be better to collect offspring closer to one edge

27

of the preserve, minimizing travel distance. However, perhaps the farther in one direction the
offspring are from the founders, the greater the risk of loss of genetic diversity and increased
offspring subdivision. One area for further study would be to analyze cohort (not population)
growth, heterozygosity and F values, and loss of genetic diversity in subregions that are at
varying distances from the founders. This would allow restoration managers to determine how
close to an edge they could collect offspring that would still retain the greatest genetic diversity
for new plantings. The results of such experiments would also provide information on the
erosion of genetic diversity over space and time in entire populations and the degree to which
erosion might be localized.

References
Barakat A, DiLoreto DS, Zhang Y, Smith C, Baier K, Powell WA, Wheeler N, Sederoff,
R, Carlson JE (2009) Comparison of the transcriptomes of American chestnut (Castanea
dentata) and Chinese chestnut (Castanea mollisima) in response to the chestnut blight infection.
BMC Plant Biology. 2009: 9-51.
Chakraborty R (1993) A class of population genetic questions formulated as the generalized
occupancy problem. Genetics. 134:953-958.
Diskin M, Steiner KC, Hebard FV (2006) Recovery of American chestnut characteristics
following hybridization and backcross breeding to restore blight-ravaged Castanea dentata.
Forest Ecology and Management. 223:439-447.
Elliot KJ, Swank WT (2008) Long-term changes in forest composition and diversity following
early logging (1919-1923) and the decline of the American chestnut (Castanea dentata). Plant
Ecology. 197: 155-172.
Huang H, Dane F, Kubisiak TL (1998) Allozyme and RAPD analysis of the genetic diversity and
geographic variation in wild populations of the American chestnut (Fagaceae). American Journal
of Botany. 85:1013-1021.
Jacobs DF (2007) Towards development of silvical strategies for forest restoration of American
chestnut (Castanea dentata) using blight resistant hybrids. Biological Conservation: 137: 497506.

28

Jansen PA, Bongers F, Van der Meer PJ (2008) Is farther seed dispersal better? Spatial patterns
of offspring mortality in three rainforest tree species with different dispersal abilities. Ecography.
31: 43-52.
Lawrence MJ, Marshall DF, Davies P (1995) Genetics of genetic conservation. I. Sample size
when collecting germplasm. Euphytica. 84: 89-99.
Merritt DJ, Dixon KW (2011) Restoration Seed Banks – A Matter of scale. Science. 332:424425.
Nathan R, Schurr FM, Spiegel O, Steinitz O, Trakhtenbrot A, Tsoar A (2008) Mechanisms of
long-distance seed dispersal. Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 23:638-647.
Paillet FL (2002) Chestnut: history and ecology of a transformed species. Journal of
Biogeography. 29:1517-1530.
Pierson SA, Keiffer CH, McCarthy BC, Rogstad SH (2007) Limited reintroduction does not
always lead to rapid loss of genetic diversity: An example from the American chestnut (Castanea
dentata: Fagaceae). Restoration Ecology. 15:420-429.
Primack RB (2010) Essentials of Conservation Biology (5th edition). Sinauer Associates.
Sunderland MA. 601 p.
Primack RB, Miao SL (1992) Dispersal can limit local plant distribution. Conservation Biology.
6:513–519.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2011) Genetic diversity in establishing plant populations: Founder number
and geometry. Science Publishers, Enfield NH. 347 p.
Russel EW (1987) Pre-blight distribution of Castanea dentata (Marsh.) Borkh. Bulletin of the
Torrey Botanical Club. 114:183-190.
Stilwell KL, Wilbur HM, Werth CR, Taylor DR (2003) Heterozygote advantage in the American
Chestnut, Castanea dentata (Fagaceae). American Journal of Botany. 90: 207-213.

29

Tables and Figures
Table 1 Input Parameters Held Constant. User specified age-specific input conditions for
reproductive rate, pollen provisioning, and mortality used in all trials. Values not given were
interpolated between bounding values. See text for more details.

30

Table 2. Percent offspring and pollen dispersed to or from each distance frame for NEWGARDEN trials described further in the text.
Trials were otherwise identical.

31

Fig. 1 Mean population sizes for each age of American chestnut populations founded at differing
diagonal inset distances. These comparative trials span 101 generations at the basic offspring and
pollen dispersal conditions (25% to and from each frame respectively). See text for more details.

32

Fig. 2 Mean number of founding alleles retained across 101 generations for trial populations
differing only in the distance to which founders were inset from a preserve border (population
sizes shown in Figure 1). For all of these trials, the “basic” conditions of offspring and pollen
dispersal distances were used (25% to or from each frame respectively). See text for more
details.

33

Fig. 3 F values across 101 generations for trials differing only in founder inset distance. These
data are from the same trials depicted in Figures 1 and 2. “Basic” offspring and pollen dispersal
conditions were used in each trial (25% to or from each frame respectively). See text for more
details.

34

Fig. 4 Mean population size differences for comparative trial populations differing as to both
founder inset distances (x-axis) and with greater or lower offspring and/or pollen dispersal
distances (indicated by different letters A through F) relative to the “basic” dispersal conditions
(see Table 2). Data points depict population size for each trial at age 100 only. In the trial
condition summaries to the right of the graph, if a dispersal type (i.e., offspring versus pollen) is
not mentioned, then dispersal follows the basic conditions.

35

Fig. 5 Change in mean number of founding alleles retained in NEWGARDEN populations after
100 bouts of mating for trials depicted in Figure 4. Trial conditions differed with regard to both
founder inset distance and offspring and pollen dispersal distances as indicated (see summaries
for A through F to the right of the graph). Connected data points show alleles retained under one
set of trial dispersal conditions when founders were placed at diagonally increasing distances
from the preserve corner (x-axis). See text for more details.

36

Fig. 6 Changes in F values in populations after 100 bouts of mating (the same populations shown
in Figures 4 and 5). Trial conditions differed with regard to both founder inset distance and
offspring and pollen dispersal distances as indicated (see summaries for A through F to the right
of the graph). Connected data points show F values under one set of trial dispersal conditions
when founders were placed at diagonally increasing distances from the preserve corner (x-axis).
See text for more details.

37

Chapter 3
Variable gene dispersal conditions and spatial deforestation patterns can interact to affect tropical
tree conservation outcomes
(Kashimshetty Y, Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2015) Variable gene dispersal conditions and spatial
deforestation patterns can interact to affect tropical tree conservation outcomes. PLoS ONE 10(5):
e0127745)

Introduction

Tropical lowland rain forests (TLRF’s) are high-diversity biomes that continue to be under threat
from anthropogenic deforestation for resource extraction and land-use change, resulting in the
breakup of once continuous forest into fragments of various sizes (Kettle 2014; Rosa et al. 2014;
Gentry 1988; Myers 1988). These forest remnants can range from 3 ha to over 120,000 ha (Hill
et al. 2011; Figeroa-Esquivel et al. 2010). A large majority of tropical tree species exist at low
population densities making them highly susceptible to local habitat disruption (Laurance et al
2014; Da Silva et al. 2008). Conservation of these vulnerable biomes is critical because they are
not only reservoirs of biodiversity, but TLRF’s provide important ecosystem services such as
moderating biogeochemical cycles and the provisioning of forest architecture, microclimate, and
nutritional resources for other organisms (Laurance et al. 2014; Soares-Filho et al. 2006;
Laurance 1999; Grimes et al. 1994).
It has been suggested that a large number of low-density tropical tree species are highly
outcrossed, thus highlighting the importance of gene flow in these populations which can in turn
affect the spatial distribution of individuals, rates of population growth, and population genetics
through space and time (Zanella et al. 2011; Ward et al. 2005). Plant gene dispersal has been
found to commonly follow a leptokurtic distribution, involving occasional long-distance
dispersal coupled with mainly short-distance dispersal ranges (Berens et al. 2013; Nathan et al.
38

2008). Fragmentation can affect these naturally-occurring gene dispersal curves (kernels) of
TLRF tree populations by bringing about changes in the natural abundance and/or behavior of
offspring and/or pollen dispersal vectors (Beckman and Rogers 2013; Ghazoul 2005). For
example, certain pollinators (e.g. some species of large bees and hummingbirds) disperse pollen
to greater distances following fragmentation by readily crossing resource-poor areas between
fragments that are separated by a few hundred meters to several hundred kilometers, respectively
(Ghazoul 2005; Schulke and Waser 2001). In contrast, some dispersers in TLRF’s (e.g. certain
species of bees, birds and small beetles) are less likely to cross open pasture beyond fragment
area, thereby restricting gene dispersal distance to within the fragment (Korfanta et al. 2012;
Laurance et al. 2009). Obviously, not all gene dispersal vectors will respond in the same way to
fragmentation, and post-fragmentation alterations in gene dispersal cannot be generalized for all
species or situations (Quesada et al. 2013; Guariguata et al. 2002). As such, the effects of a range
of post-fragmentation alterations in offspring and pollen dispersal distances need to be tested to
determine how fragmentation might affect population growth and genetic diversity trends of
TLRF tree populations.
TLRF fragments created as a result of initial deforestation can undergo further
disturbance in the form of different types of logging activities from clear cutting to selective
logging and Reduced Intensity Logging (RIL) (Corlett and Primack 2010; Putz et al. 2009; Huth
and Ditzer 2001). Clear-cutting is the removal of essentially all aboveground biomass, whereas
selective logging is a less intense form of deforestation that involves the removal of only the
economically valuable trees, these usually being the largest trees (Gaveau et al. 2014; Sist et al.
2014; Carneiro et al. 2011). Studies on selective logging in Amazonian forests showed that
logging fewer, larger tracts of TLRF’s was advantageous in reducing any negative impacts on

39

the functional composition of the remaining stand (e.g., increasing the number of early
successional species; Baroloto et al. 2012). The life-history characteristics of the tree species
being selectively-logged, e.g. minimum reproduction DBH (cm), has also been reported as being
an important factor in determining the overall sustainability of population genetic diversity from
this type of deforestation (Vinson et al. 2015).
Reduced Intensity Logging (RIL) is a lower-intensity form of selective logging where
less damaging wood transportation systems are also coupled with measures implemented to
better protect pre- and post-logging seedlings (West et al. 2014; Putz et al. 2009; Jennings et al.
2001). Previous RIL simulation studies have shown that certain life-history traits are important
determinants in post-logging population recovery, with size-class distributions being the most
influential factor, followed by growth rates
(DBH increments) and mortality rates (Alvarez-Buyalla et al. 1996). The success of RIL was
found to partly depend upon sufficiently long cutting cycles that enabled natural regeneration
processes to occur (Huth and Ditzer 2001).
One aspect of logging that has not been fully explored is whether different spatial logging
patterns of TLRF trees in forest fragments might affect the demographic dynamics and the
genetics of populations with varying life-history characteristics. For example, are there certain
geometrical patterns of tree removal which are more sustainable in terms of improved population
re-growth and genetic diversity retention over others? How do these variable patterns of logging
interact with post-fragmentation alterations in life-history traits such as gene dispersal distances
in terms of population recovery and genetic diversity retention? Detailed research into such
issues is necessary to help reduce the high rates of rain forest biodiversity alteration and loss,
(Reisch and Bernhardt-Rommermann 2014; Lowe et al. 2005; Pearce et al. 2003). For example,

40

such interventions could affect existent population abundance and growth dynamics, as well as
the spatial distribution patterns of offspring recruitment and/or pollen dispersal, and thus have a
potential effect on the viability of the population in the short and/or long term (Babweteera and
Brown 2010).
To study these aspects of TLRF deforestation and fragmentation, the goal of this research
was to investigate the effects of different spatial logging patterns on a plant functional type (that
of a long-lived, tropical canopy tree population) that is commercially exploited, under a range of
different offspring and pollen dispersal distances potentially resulting from post-fragmentation
shifts in dispersal vector abundance and/or behavior (Carneiro et al. 2009; Rumana et al. 2009;
Köhler et al. 2000). Alternatively, the experimental virtual populations examined here could be
thought of as different species that share most of their life history characteristics except for
offspring and pollen dispersal kernels: how would fragmented populations of these different
species respond to different deforestation practices? A central objective of this study was to
determine whether tree removal patterns could be found that differentially maximized population
recovery and genetic diversity retention, and/or kept population subdivision and inbreeding
levels low, in order to recommend more sustainable extraction practices and effective
conservation strategies under particular gene dispersal scenarios. We hypothesized that TRLF
tree populations would respond differently to post-fragmentation alterations in gene dispersal
and variable spatial patterns and types of logging (i.e., in lines, at edges, or selective logging) in
terms of their population recovery, genetic diversity retention, inbreeding, and population
subdivision.
Given the stochastic nature of several processes driving population development in
natural populations, a high level of experimental replication is crucial for providing statistically

41

accurate short- and long-term insights regarding the issues we are addressing (Haymes and Fox
2012; Vanclay 2003). Sufficient experimental replication in the field in tropical low land rain
forests (TLRF’s) is currently not feasible due to expenditures and spans of time needed (AlvarezBuyalla et al. 1996). As such, we used a spatially-explicit computer simulation program,
NEWGARDEN, which models the population growth and genetic diversity dynamics of plant
populations through time, and which is also capable of highly replicated computer modeling
providing statistical robustness (Pelikan et al. 2015), to conduct an entirely theoretical modeling
study exploring how, for a ‘typical’ TLRF long-lived canopy tree, alternative deforestation
methodologies in TLFR fragments can interact with differing gene dispersal patterns to affect
subsequent population recovery and genetics (Rogstad and Pelikan 2013a; Rogstad and Pelikan
2013b; Pelikan and Rogstad 2013; Kashimshetty et al. 2012; Rogstad and Pelikan 2011).

Methods

NEWGARDEN

NEWGARDEN (NG) is a spatially explicit, individual-based computer program that simulates
natural population development of plant species through bouts of mating, and provides output to
assess population growth, genetic diversity, population subdivision and/or inbreeding level
trajectories of the developing, comparative, virtual populations. Population development is
conditioned by user defined input parameters such as genetic diversity of the source population;
geometric number, age distribution and pattern of the founders; gene dispersal distance kernels;
etc.

42

NG operates based on a set of user-specified input conditions that specify: 1) the
characteristics of the preserve fragment system; 2) the number, geometric placement, genetic
diversity, and age distribution of the founding population; and 3) several life-history
characteristics such as age-specific offspring and pollen production, mortality and life-span
describing the species being modeled. Each set of user-specified input conditions constitutes a
“trial”. For each set of trial input conditions, the user can define the number of replicate “run”
analyses using those conditions to be performed, thus allowing for statistical comparisons of
mean output values for intra-trial runs (given with standard deviations) between contrasting
trials. Output statistics compared across trials from each successive bout of reproduction for the
entire population include means for population size, measures of genetic diversity including the
number of founding alleles retained, observed and expected heterozygosity, and Fit values
reflecting population subdivision and/or inbreeding (interpreted according to (Hartl and Clark
1997). These mean values can be compared across trials using ANOVA’s and T-tests of means.
In this way, output from trials differing in input conditions can be compared to examine the
effect of varying one or more characteristic(s) on the population growth and genetic diversity of
resultant populations (Pelikan and Rogstad 2013; Rogstad and Pelikan 2013a&b; Rogstad and
Pelikan 2011).
Review of previous forest simulation models indicates NG as not fitting any one model
classification (e.g., it is not entirely a physiologically-based process model, gap model or an
empirical stand model; Landsberg and Sands 2011; Bugmann 2001; Liu and Ashton 1995).
While NG does share some features with other programs, (e.g. it seeks to describe population
growth through the processes of recruitment, growth and mortality and it can model gap and nongap situations (see Landsberg and Sands 2011; Bugmann 2001; Liu and Ashton 1995), it is

43

unlike any other program currently available as it combines different features of a range of
models and contains unique features as well. For example, 1) it models a full range of life-history
traits set by age-specific probabilities including reproduction, pollen production and mortality; 2)
it is driven by explicit ‘virtual’ life-history events such as reproduction, gene dispersal and
mortality which are set by age-specific parameters and not by mathematical growth equations
nor any physiologically based equations regarding photosynthesis, carbon balance and other
abiotic conditions; 3) it has the ability to model different mating systems including
agamospermy, different levels of selfing, and dioecy; 4) it allows the user to specify, for a given
NG trial, the genetic diversity of the source population, spatial location and age structure of the
founders; 5) it can model complex genetic histories including multi-locus founder genetic
diversity levels where the user can set desired allele frequencies, self-incompatibility alleles and
effects of inbreeding depression; 6) it models reproduction, dispersal and immigration in a
spatially-explicit manner including offspring and pollen dispersal distance categorical
probabilities, allowing mating events only between eligible pollen donors and pistillate
individuals; 7) it can model spatially heterogeneous landscapes that can change through time; 8)
it is capable of high levels of replication of comparative simulations, and calculates means and
standard deviations for important measures to inform conservation practices, such as population
growth, genetic diversity levels and population genetic statistics like Fit and Fst over time; and 9)
output reported after each new bout of mating include both entire standing crop versus only the
most recent cohort data, and includes coordinates, parentage, allelic status, and age of death of
all individuals as well as other statistics if requested (S1 Table; Rogstad and Pelikan 2013a;
Rogstad and Pelikan 2013b; Pelikan and Rogstad 2013; Kashimshetty et al. 2012; Rogstad and
Pelikan 2011). NG is freely available, with associated materials and program updates, by

44

agreement with Science Publishers (Enfield, NH) at:
http://math.uc.edu/~pelikan/NEWGARDEN/.

Control Equilibrium Population

Our modeling was centered on the plant functional type of a long-lived, canopy tree species since
this group is commonly harvested for timber in TLRF’s (Carneiro et al. 2009; Jennings et al.
2001; Köhler et al. 2000; Chudnoff 1980). A “control equilibrium population” (one not changing
in size through bouts of mating; Berryman 1991) for this plant functional type was developed to
enable the simulation of comparative trials of an initially stable baseline tree population that then
undergoes varying spatial logging patterns and modification of gene dispersal conditions.
To develop and model this control population of a ‘typical’ TLRF long-lived canopy tree,
we incorporated some of the initial input life history characteristics from one of the better studied
TLRF canopy trees, Symphonia globulifera L. f. (Clusiaceae), a widespread species distributed in
several regions of the Neotropics and the West African tropics (Budde et al. 2013; Gill et al.
1998). Since no single tropical tree species has been studied for all the parameters utilizable with
NG (including S. globulifera), we used empirical studies on other species, or groups of species
(FRIM 1993) thought to be typical of this plant functional type to derive other life-history
parameters for these computer simulations.
For example, studies on the commonly exploited canopy tree species S. globulifera
provided estimates for population density, age-class distribution, mating system and preserve
characteristics, while data from a 50-ha rain forest plot in Pasoh, Malaysia provided estimates for
size-class distribution for the smaller size-classes, and data on mortality rates were derived from

45

a study on tropical canopy tree species from La Selva, Costa Rica (Carneiro et al. 2009; Metcalf
et al. 2009; Degen et al. 2004; FRIM 1993). The equilibrium population was based on our best
estimates of the life history conditions for a tropical, long-lived canopy tree species and setting
the reproductive value (r, average offspring produced per individual in a given round of mating)
such that the population size remained stable. These control equilibrium population conditions
were subsequently perturbed by altering logging patterns and gene dispersal conditions in
comparative trials to analyze the resulting population growth and genetic diversity consequences
of such alterations. It is important to note that the aim of this research was not to model one
particular TLRF plant species. Rather, we attempted to model responses of different populations
of a more or less “representative species” of a particular functional group that varied in internal
patterns of culling and/or gene dispersal distances.
With a complex study like ours which explored the effects of both spatial logging pattern
and gene dispersal distances (via both offspring and pollen), it was simpler to begin with a basic
equilibrium population to determine the general effects of these variables separately, as well their
synergistic effects. As we were mainly varying two variables in this study (spatial logging
pattern, and gene dispersal condition) to specifically analyze their population growth and genetic
diversity consequences, it was necessary to control for all the other parameters including the
equilibrium state of the founding population in order to detect and measure the effects of the
variables under scrutiny.

Parameters held constant among trials

Preserve characteristics.

46

In NG simulations of the preserve system, individuals establish on a Cartesian grid system, the
establishment points of which are called grid points. The distance between two grid points is
meant to reflect the naturally-occurring average minimum distance between two mature,
reproductive individuals in the population. We modeled a 500 ha plot based on a study of S.
globulifera in the Tapajos National Forest, Brazil (equivalent to a 160 x 160 grid point fragment
in NG; modified to be in the shape of a square to begin simulations with the simplest shape
possible; Fig. 1) with the average minimum distance between two reproductive individuals being
14m, as reported in the literature (Carneiro et al. 2009). The initial control equilibrium
population comprised of 965 founders randomly placed in the 500 ha un-logged fragment, with a
resulting density of 1.932 individuals/ha (with ~ 0.332 reproductive individuals/ ha), with equal
probabilities of dispersing offspring to or receiving pollen from each distance frame respectively,
relative to a pistillate individual selected for mating (see below for gene dispersal descriptions).

Age class distribution.
The age-class distribution was based on field data of S. globulifera from Tapajos National forest
Brazil (Carneiro et al. 2009) and size-class distribution data and growth rates reported from
Pasoh, Malaysia (further details in S1 Appendix; Condit et al. 1999; FRIM 1993). It was set as
follows: Ages 1 to 168 (1 to 15cm DBH) represent seedlings, saplings and young juveniles
which collectively make up approximately 81% of the population (some tropical trees have been
reported to take 98–183 years to reach 10 cm DBH; Clark and Clark 1994), ages 169 to 236 (16
to 30 cm DBH) reflect the juvenile age classes which form ~ 10%, and greater than age 236
(30cm DBH) represent mature reproductive individuals that make up 9% of the population.

47

Loci and allelic variation.
NEWGARDEN is capable of modeling founding populations with a user designated numbers of
loci, each locus having a user specified number of alleles, and with each allele having a user
specified initial founding population allele frequency (Pelikan and Rogstad 2013; Rogstad and
Pelikan 2011). In our analyses here (and previously: e.g., (Rogstad and Pelikan 2013a;
Kashimshetty et al. 2012) all individuals were simulated to have 30 loci, with each locus in the
source population having 100 alleles, each of these alleles occurring at a frequency of 0.01. We
use this loci configuration for several reasons. Although natural populations will have much
more complex loci panel structures, it would not only be arbitrary to choose one at random, but
we also want to use a simplified, easy-to-interpret null model for ready comparison among trials.
Such low frequency alleles are a more sensitive and readily interpretable indicator of changes in
population genetic diversity compared to the much less sensitive changes in heterozygosity or
gene frequencies at loci with fewer, more common alleles (Allendorf and Luikart 2001). In small
populations such as found in tropical rain forests, considering the thousands of intraspecific loci,
surely a considerable portion of these loci will include low frequency alleles such as those we
model. Rare alleles can arise in a number of ways (e.g., genetic drift, population immigration or
emigration; selection, de novo mutation, etc.). Such alleles are of especial concern in
conservation efforts since they are easily lost and yet may have potential significance under
differing circumstances (e.g., Soria-Carrasco et al. 2014; Zhao et al. 2014; Blount et al. 2012).
In conservation efforts, loss of the most common alleles is relatively unlikely, and thus less
worrisome than loss of rare alleles. Further, we have shown that populations experiencing higher

48

rates of loss of rare alleles tend to have a greater variance in the frequencies of more common
alleles (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011; work in progress). Monitoring the magnitude of rare allele
loss over time can be used as an indirect way to estimate the degree of expected variance in the
frequencies of more common alleles in the population. Thus our results with loss of rare alleles
reflect the expected degree of variance of common alleles under the different experimental
conditions compared. Greater loss of rare alleles and the associated greater variance in the
frequencies of common alleles can make populations less tractable to the processes of natural
selection, and more susceptible to random genetic drift. By analyzing the rate at which rare
alleles are lost, the effects of genetic drift versus natural selection can perhaps be more readily
interpreted (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011; work in progress).

Mating system
The plant functional type modeled was a hermaphroditic species with a selfing rate of 0.098 in
all trials (Carneiro et al. 2009; Degen et al. 2004; Aldrich and Hamrick 1998).

Offspring and pollen production
In NG simulations, the user designates an age-specific reproduction rate, based on which
offspring are generated from the mating of randomly selected eligible individuals. Offspring
produced from mating events are distributed across eligible reproducing individuals following a
Poisson distribution. The reproduction rate is meant to simulate naturally occurring phenomenon
where not all the seedlings produced from a mating event will successfully establish. Studies
have found fecundity to be associated with increase in tree size in certain tropical tree species,
where canopy trees reach reproductive capacity at approximately 30cm DBH, this generally

49

being the time taken to reach the canopy (Clark and Clark 1994). The age-specific reproduction
rate for the control equilibrium population was as follows: Ages 140 to 167 = 0.5, 168 to 195 =
2.5, 196 to 235 = 7.8, 236 to 424 = 8.0, 425 = 0.0 (Table S2). Pollen production pattern was
similar to age-specific reproduction: Ages 140 to 167 = 0.10, 168 to 195 = 0.15, 196 to 215 =
0.20, 216 to 235 = 0.60, 236 to 424 = 1.0, 425 = 0.75, 426 = 0.0 (Table S2).

Mortality
Age-specific mortality rates were based on a modified version of tropical tree mortality patterns
reported from studies in La Selva, Costa Rica (Metcalf et al. 2009). Mortality rates, which along
with age-specific reproduction, were altered to obtain as near an equilibrium population as
possible, were set as follows: Ages 0 to 10 = 25%, 11 to 25 = 14%, 26 to 50: 0.75%, 51 to 75:
0.85%, 76 to 100: 0.95%, 101 to 425: 1% (Table S3). Further details regarding the functioning of
the age-specific mortality parameter in NG, can be found in S1 Appendix.

Parameters that varied among comparative trials

Offspring and pollen dispersal
In NG, offspring and pollen dispersal distance kernels were simulated via a series of
hierarchically nested limiting distance frames, for each of which probabilities of dispersing
offspring to, and receiving pollen from, can be designated relative to each pistillate individual
selected for mating. The lower and upper limits of each distance frame are specified on the
Cartesian fragment grid system (Kashimshetty et al. 2012; Rogstad and Pelikan 2011). Offspring
and pollen dispersal was varied across comparative trials to simulate ‘Near’, ‘Equal’ or ‘Far’

50

distances. To model these dispersal conditions, we created five distance frames, whose
dimensions in the x or y direction around a pistillate individual selected for mating are (gp = grid
points): a) 0 to 32 gp (448 m); b) 32 to 64 gp (896 m); c) 64 to 96 gp (1344 m); d) 96 to 128
(1792 m); and e) 128 to 160 (2240 m). ‘Near’ gene dispersal condition corresponded to 80%
probability of dispersing offspring to or receiving pollen from the nearest distance frame, the
‘Equal’ condition to equal probability of dispersing offspring or receiving pollen (20%) from
each distance frame, and the ‘Far’ condition to 80% probability of dispersing offspring to or
receiving pollen from the furthest distance frame (S1 Fig. and S4 Table).
All possible combinations of ‘Near’, ‘Equal’ and ‘Far’ variations for offspring versus
pollen dispersal distances resulted in a total of nine gene dispersal regimes being tested: NONP,
NPEO, FONP, NOEP, EOEP, FOEP, NOFP, EOFP, FOFP; (N = ‘Near’, F = ‘Far’, E = ‘Equal’,
O = offspring, P = Pollen).

Comparative logging patterns
The initial control equilibrium population was modified in comparative trials to study six
contrasting spatial logging patterns, each comprising a total of 10% (50 ha) removal of the
original 500 ha fragment in varying patterns including: one side strip (Strip); three equal area,
vertical, equidistantly separated strips (3Strips); four internal, equidistantly separated, equal area
subdivided squares (4Squares); four equal area corner squares (Corners); one horizontal central
road (Road); and one central square (CentralSq) (Fig. 1). In addition, selective logging (Selective
Logging) was also modeled as the removal of the top 10% of individuals based on age class. All
logging patterns, including an un-logged control fragment were tested with all of the nine gene
dispersal conditions, resulting in a total of 72 trials being performed.

51

Data Analyses
Each set of trial conditions was analyzed through 600 bouts of mating for 100 replicate runs.
Replicate run output values for two different classes of summary data, ‘entire fragment’ data
which included data calculated from the entire 500 ha fragment and ‘recovery region’ data
calculated from only the combined logged areas of the fragment, were generated for each trial.
Two-factor ANOVA’s were performed to assess the amount of variance explained by logging
pattern, gene dispersal condition, and their interaction, in the output (mean population size,
founding allele retention, and population subdivision/inbreeding levels). A separate set of two
factor ANOVA’s were also used to determine the relative impact of offspring versus pollen
dispersal distance, and their interaction, on the amount of variance explained in the output. For
this last set of ANOVA’s the mean variance reported in the results for each output was an
average across all spatial logging patterns. Unpaired T-tests (Bonferroni corrected) were
conducted between trials to ascertain whether means were significantly different (p<0.05).

Results

Below are the results from two different classes of summary data: ‘entire fragment’ data which
included data calculated from the entire 500 ha fragment, and ‘recovery region’ data calculated
from only the combined logged areas of the fragment.

Mean Population Size—Entire fragment

52

Trials with the same gene dispersal distance conditions but variable spatial logging pattern
showed similar population growth through 600 bouts of mating, although there was extensive
variation among trials grouped according to dispersal conditions (Fig. 2). The gene dispersal
condition that maximized population growth was when offspring and pollen were dispersed
to/from ‘Near’ distances (Group A; Figs 2 and 3). Trials with offspring dispersal biased to
‘Near’ distances (Groups A-C) had the highest mean population sizes followed by ‘Equal’
(Groups D-F) and then ‘Far’ (Groups G-I) distances respectively, regardless of pollen dispersal
condition. However, within the offspring dispersal “Near” category trials (Groups A-C), as well
as the “Equal” category (Groups D-F), population growth is highest when pollen dispersal is
“Near” (Groups A and D), and lowest when pollen dispersal is “Far” (Groups C and F; Figs 2
and 3). Similarly, control trials simulating unlogged fragments responded significantly to
variation in gene dispersal condition (Figs 2 and 3). Two-way ANOVA analysis showed that
offspring dispersal distance had a greater impact on population growth, accounting for a mean
variance of 87.6%, compared to pollen dispersal (6.3%) and their interaction (4.9%).
Those trials sharing the same spatial logging pattern but with variable gene dispersal
conditions did not exhibit similarities in mean population size trajectories and endpoints (Groups
A-I; Fig. 2). A two-way ANOVA to show the relative effects of gene dispersal condition versus
logging pattern on population growth, indicated that gene dispersal condition explained higher
variance in this output (98.5%, p<0.0001, F = 79781.62, df = 8, N = 9) relative to logging pattern
(0.2%, p<0.0001, F = 203.20, df = 7, N = 8) and the interaction of the two (0.2%,
p<0.0001, F = 23.76, df = 56, N = 72; Fig. 3).00200020Selective logging tended to have the
lowest population growth for the six highest population-maximizing trials (Groups A-F; Groups
G-I did not manifest biologically meaningful differences; Fig. 3).

53

Mean Population Size—Recovery Regions

When fragment recovery regions only (combined logged areas only) were considered, trials with
the same gene dispersal conditions did show some similarity in population growth trajectories
and endpoints, although variation of endpoints among deforestation patterns was evident within
gene dispersal groups (S2 Fig. and Fig. 4). A two-way ANOVA for showing the effect of
offspring versus pollen dispersal distance on population growth in the recovery regions indicated
that offspring dispersal distance had a greater impact, accounting for 80.9% of the mean variance
relative to pollen dispersal (8.8%), and the interaction of the two dispersal types (7.4%).
Within gene dispersal groups, the recovery regions showed more variability in population
recovery with regards to spatial logging pattern than did similar comparisons for the entire
fragment data. In five of the nine gene dispersal condition groups, situating logged areas closer
to the fragment borders (Strip, Corners) generated significantly lower mean population recovery
compared to those trials that were logged further away from fragment borders (CentralSq,
4Squares, 3Strips; Groups A, B, D, E and F, Fig. 4). However, the CentralSq extraction pattern
trial with ‘Near’ offspring and ‘Far’ pollen dispersal (within Group C; Fig. 4), had significantly
lower levels of population recovery compared to other trials with the same gene dispersal
condition. Group C was the only group in which this deforestation method exhibited such a
pattern.
A two-way ANOVA showed that gene dispersal condition accounted for the most
variance among recovery region endpoints (89.27%, p<0.0001, F = 26559.55, df = 8, N = 9). In

54

the recovery regions, logging pattern, and the interaction of logging pattern and gene dispersal
condition, accounted for 2.22% (p<0.0001, F = 1054.89, df = 5, N = 6) and 6.27% (p<0.0001,
F = 373.03, df = 8, N = 9; Fig. 4) of the variance respectively, this being more than that
accounted for by these factors in the entire fragment. Thus, logging pattern, and the interaction of
logging pattern and gene dispersal condition, caused greater variability in population growth in
the recovery regions than in the entire fragment.

Founding allele retention—Entire fragment

Variation in alleles retained within the entire fragment appears to be influenced by gene dispersal
groupings, showing a difference of 11.0% between the most extreme trials (Corners—‘Near’
offspring and pollen vs. Selective Logging—‘Far’ offspring and ‘Equal’ pollen; S3 Fig.). Within
gene dispersal groups (Groups A-I, S3 Fig.), Selective Logging trials consistently displayed
significantly lower levels of founding allele retention relative to other logging patterns.
Disregarding these Selective Logging trials, within-group variability among all other logging
patterns did not show greater than a 4.8% difference in founding alleles retained (S3 Fig.).
A two-way ANOVA to depict relative contributions of gene dispersal condition versus
spatial logging pattern in explaining variation in founding allele retention, indicated that gene
dispersal condition accounted for the highest amount of variance (88.3%, p<0.0001,
F = 15387.98, df = 8, N = 9) than spatial logging pattern (4.8%, p<0.0001, F = 951.57, df = 7,
N = 8) or the interaction of the two (1.9%, p<0.0001, F = 46.55, df = 56, N = 72; S3 Fig.). As
expected, those trials and gene dispersal conditions that maximized population growth (‘Near’
followed by ‘Equal’ then ‘Far’ offspring dispersal) generally retained the highest number of

55

founding alleles (see S1 Appendix; S3 Fig.). Variation in offspring dispersal distance had a
greater impact on alleles retained, as a two-way ANOVA indicated that offspring dispersal
explained a mean variance of 90.3%, compared to pollen dispersal (3.7%) and the interaction of
the two dispersal types (0.43%). Control trials responded significantly to variation in offspring
dispersal, with ‘Near’ dispersal (Groups A-C) retaining the most alleles, followed by ‘Equal’ and
‘Far’ respectively (Groups D-F & G-I respectively; S3 Fig.).

Founding allele retention—Recovery region

Compared to entire fragment results, there was a similar, but more pronounced decreasing trend
for founding allele retention in recovery regions from offspring ‘Near’ dispersal trials to when
offspring were dispersed to greater (‘Far’) distances (Fig. 5). Variance explained by offspring,
pollen dispersal and their interaction (as demonstrated by a two-way ANOVA), was similar to
entire fragment trends (see S1 Appendix). Gene dispersal condition impacted allele retention the
most, as a two-way ANOVA indicated that gene dispersal condition explained 97.3% of the
variance (p<0.0001, F = 34685.28) relative to spatial logging pattern alterations (<0.01%,
p<0.0001, F = 20.17) and the interaction of the two (0.8%, p<0.0001, F = 57.34; Fig. 5). For
gene dispersal groups A, B, D, E, and F (when offspring dispersal was either ‘Near’ or ‘Equal’),
a greater retention of founding alleles for spatial logging patterns situated closer to the border
(i.e., Corners and Strip) was found relative to more centrally located logging areas (CentralSq,
4Squares, 3Strips; Fig. 5).

Population subdivision/inbreeding—Entire fragment

56

After 600 bouts of mating, Fit for the entire fragment for most dispersal condition groups and
deforestation patterns indicated that moderate inbreeding/subdivision had occurred to varying
degrees (Fig 6. and S4 Fig.). Trials with ‘Near’ offspring and ‘Far’ pollen dispersal distances,
(Group 1; Fig. 6), showed increasing inbreeding and population subdivision, reaching moderate
but increasing levels by the mating bout 600, with little sign that this trend would change with
further bouts of mating. All other remaining gene dispersal conditions except for ‘Far’ offspring
and pollen dispersal achieve a stable level of moderate inbreeding by approximately mating bout
175 (Groups 2 and 3; Fig. 6). After 600 bouts of mating, trials varying in spatial logging patterns,
and control trials (trials where no logging occurred) did not exhibit biologically meaningful
differences in Fit values within gene dispersal groups (S4 Fig.).
A two-way ANOVA analysis to demonstrate the relative effects of gene dispersal
condition and spatial logging patterns on Fit levels showed that gene dispersal condition had the
greatest impact (explaining 82.0% of the variance, p<0.0001, F = 4240.7, df = 8, N = 9) followed
by the interaction of the two (0.6%, p<0.0001, F = 4.34, df = 56) and logging pattern respectively
(0.2%, p<0.0001, F = 13.45, df = 7, N = 8; S4 Fig.). A separate two-way ANOVA comparing the
relative contributions of offspring versus pollen dispersal in explaining variation in Fit levels
showed that the interaction of offspring and pollen dispersal had the greatest impact, explaining
the highest mean variance (47.9%), followed by pollen dispersal (28.7%) and offspring dispersal
(6.3%).

57

Population subdivision/inbreeding—Recovery regions

Fit trajectories and endpoints were more complex in the recovery regions relative to the entire
fragment (S5 Fig.). Trials ended with essentially moderate levels of inbreeding/subdivision to
varying degrees, except some trials with ‘Far’ offspring and ‘Near’ pollen (Group 1; S5 Fig.)
exhibited trajectories suggestive of greater Fit levels being reached in future generations.
Although a two-way ANOVA showed that gene dispersal condition explained the most variance
in Fit (38.0%, p<0.0001, F = 475.4, df = 8, N = 9) compared to the interaction (6.2%, p<0.0001,
F = 15.55, df = 40), and logging pattern (2.4%, p<0.0001, F = 47.6, df = 5; S6 Fig.), the
magnitude of this variance was much less than in the entire fragment. One particular trial
(CentralSq, ‘Near’ offspring and ‘Far’ pollen, trial z; S5 Fig.) showed unusually high Fit values
across early generations (ranging from 0.126–0.138) relative to all other trials. A separate twoway ANOVA analysis for demonstrating the relative effect of offspring versus pollen dispersal
distance, showed that offspring dispersal distance had the greatest impact on Fit levels in the
recovery regions, explaining a mean variance of 21.3%, followed by the interaction of the two
dispersal conditions (14.7%) and pollen dispersal (10.1%).

Discussion

This study explored the effects of variable spatial logging pattern and gene dispersal distances
(via both offspring and pollen) on recovery population growth and genetic diversity dynamics for
the plant functional type of a long-lived TLRF canopy tree species. Alternative combinations of

58

logging pattern and gene dispersal distance affected this tropical population in different ways and
to varying extents as described below. Different species and/or populations may respond quite
distinctly to various extraction patterns depending on post-fragmentation dispersal attributes.

Gene Dispersal condition

These simulations demonstrated how populations or similar species with different gene dispersal
characteristics will respond differently to alternate disturbance patterns within fragments. Most
of the variation in mean population size, retention of founding alleles, and population
subdivision/inbreeding levels for both the entire fragments as well as recovery regions was
attributable to differences in gene dispersal condition. In fragments of the size used here (500 ha)
and conditions simulated in this study, populations exhibiting ‘Near’ offspring and pollen
dispersal exhibited the highest population growth rates leading to greater levels of founding
allele retention. Higher levels of rare allele retention have been found to be associated with lower
variance in the frequencies of common alleles, making populations more tractable to the process
of natural selection and less so to random genetic drift (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011; work in
progress). Thus, changes in offspring and/or pollen dispersal distances brought about by
fragmentation acting on genetic diversity retention, can potentially have consequences for the
evolutionary trajectory of populations.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to compare the effects of varying
offspring versus pollen dispersal distances in TLRF fragments for this particular plant functional
type. Our results indicate that offspring dispersal distance seems to be of greater importance

59

relative to pollen dispersal and the interaction of the two dispersal types, in terms of its impact on
population growth and founding allele retention as it explains a higher level of output variation.
Nevertheless, variation in pollen dispersal distance can cause reduced but significant alterations
in population growth and genetic diversity retention. The relative role of offspring dispersal is
reduced for variation seen in population subdivision and/or inbreeding where the interaction of
the two dispersal types takes on greater importance in the entire fragment. While pollen disperses
genes in the haploid state, offspring genes are disseminated in the diploid state and thus
contribute more to the genetic neighborhood size (Aguilée et al. 2013; Hamilton 1999).
The comparative trials here show that population differentiation and inbreeding for the
entire fragment and recovery regions have a marked increase in Fit (to moderate levels) for the
‘Far’ offspring /‘Near’ pollen dispersal condition compared to all other trials, which exhibited
little or no genetic spatial differentiation or inbreeding. When pollen is received primarily from
‘Near’ distances, there is a greater chances of locating eligible pollen donors for mating since the
‘Near’ dispersal distance range would fall within the fragment area and not outside of it.
However, once mating occurs and offspring are produced, a relatively large proportion of these
are dispersed to ‘Far’ distances off the fragment, leaving behind a small number of surviving
individuals. The repetition of this process over time apparently leads to the creation of
increasingly smaller and isolated subpopulations, which are more susceptible to increased
inbreeding levels (Paul et al. 2013; Quesada et al. 2013). The reverse of this gene dispersal
condition (‘Near’ offspring and ‘Far’ pollen dispersal) does not, in this study, lead to such an
increase in Fit values, suggesting the latter conditions are more effective in facilitating gene
flow. These results demonstrate how varying offspring and pollen dispersal distances can interact
to produce differences in the spatial genetic structure of a population Zanella et al. 2011).

60

Taken together, the results here suggest that changes in the abundance and/or behavior of
pollinators and/or offspring dispersers occurring after fragmentation of populations of tropical
long-lived canopy tree species, or the occurrence of such differences among species, will lead to
complex and sometimes pronounced variation in the demographic trends and genetics for such
populations or species going forward. NG-type analyses can be useful in predicting those species
most at risk, and “best practices” for deforestation pattern, in fragments of a given size, although
these simulations stress the importance of obtaining accurate life-history information
(e.g., gene dispersal kernel estimates) for target species.

Spatial logging pattern

Variations in spatial logging pattern explained lower levels of variance in population growth and
genetic diversity levels compared to that accounted for by gene dispersal condition. This
suggests that alterations in the spatial pattern of logging will not bring about large differences in
resulting population recovery and population genetic dynamics, as would shifts in gene dispersal
distances under the conditions modeled in this study. The most notable effect of spatial logging
pattern detected from the results was that logging pattern frequently seemed to be of most
consequence for population growth and founding allele retention in recovery regions when
logging was situated closer to the border (e.g., Corners, Strip). Specifically, in five of the nine
gene dispersal scenarios modeled, population recovery and allele retention were lower for
deforestation occurring nearer borders.
Selective logging of the top 10% of the oldest or largest individuals tended to yield the
lowest rates of population recovery and founding allele retention relative to the other extraction

61

patterns. This supports the notion that moderate harvesting of non-timber products obtainable
from a range of size-class groups could be more sustainable than harvesting for the largest trees
only, as the latter puts greater pressure on the more reproductive size-classes (Laurance et al.
2012).

Conservation implications

NG modeling can be used to model population trends under different fragment sizes, gene
dispersal conditions, deforestation patterns, or other life-history characteristics that can be
characterized in NG input, for species of concern. Since trends in population growth, genetic
diversity retention, and/or inbreeding and subdivision here were, in some cases, highly sensitive
to post-fragmentation alterations in gene dispersal conditions, one practical management
technique might include interventions to potentially alter offspring and/or pollen dispersal
distances (manual manipulations or alteration of dispersal vector agents) to reflect those that
maximize population size and the retention of genetic diversity for the population and conditions
simulated in this study. Even if a newly established fragment has not undergone internal
deforestation, any subsequent changes in gene dispersal distances due to fragmentation can affect
population sizes and genetic diversity retention to a great extent as suggested by the results from
the control trials simulating unlogged fragments under varying gene dispersal conditions.
In this study, which explores the effects of both spatial logging pattern and gene dispersal
distances (including both offspring and pollen dispersal distances), it was simpler to begin with a
control population initially in genetic equilibrium in a spatially uniform landscape to determine
the general effects of these variables separately, as well their synergistic effects. We refrained

62

from choosing one of the numerous alternative population-genetic and/or spatially heterogeneous
scenarios that could be modeled, as this would have been an arbitrary decision and made
interpretation more complex. Nevertheless, a multitude of other complex non-equilibrium
population and genetic history scenarios that may have occurred at different locations
(e.g., genetic bottlenecks, founder effects etc.) as well as different kinds of spatially
heterogeneous landscapes can be modeled by NEWGARDEN when site-specific information is
available concerning the various user-defined input parameters. For example, if the history of a
particular forest fragment is known or suspected, NEWGARDEN can be used to modify the
characteristics of the initial population and geographical aspects of the forest to explore the
demographic and population genetic consequences of such modifications. As tropical low land
rain forests share similar general abiotic (e.g., precipitation and solar radiation levels, humidity,
etc.) and biotic (low population densities, species diversity in guilds of offspring and pollen
dispersers servicing plant taxa, soil microbes, etc.) characteristics, the general scenarios and
conclusions described from this study for this plant functional type are not confined to one
region of the tropics, but theoretically to tropical low land rain forests across the equatorial belt
(Kircher 2011). The diversity of the life-history characteristics of TLRF trees suggests that
fragmented and deforested populations may exhibit a wide variety of intra- and interspecific
responses. Thus, we emphasize that the trial comparisons here are not meant to be exhaustive.
Rather, population responses under scenarios where numerous other features vary, such as
fragment sizes, shapes, establishment densities, gene dispersal or other life history
characteristics, removal regimens, etc., can be explored with NG.

63

References
Aguilée R, Shaw FH, Rousset F, Shaw RG, Ronce O (2013) How does pollen versus seed
dispersal affect niche evolution. Evolution 67:792–805.
Aldrich P, Hamrick J (1998) Reproductive dominance of pasture trees in a fragmented tropical
forest mosaic. Science 281:103–105.
Allendorf FW, Luikart G (2001) Conservation and the genetics of populations. MA: Blackwell
publishing. pp124–130.
Alvarez-Buyalla ER, Garcia-Barrios R, Lara-Moreno C, Martinez-Ramos M (1996)
Demographic and genetic models in conservation biology: applications and perspectives for
tropical rain forest tree species. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 27: 387–421.
Babweteera F, Brown N (2010) Spatial patterns of tree recruitment in East African tropical
forests that have lost their vertebrate seed dispersers. Journal of Tropical Ecology 26: 193–203.
Baroloto C, Herault B, Paine CE, Massot H, Blanc L, Bonal D, et al. (2012) Contrasting
taxonomic and functional responses of a tropical tree community to selective logging. Journal of
Applied Ecology. 49:861–870.
Beckman NG, Rogers HS (2013) Consequences of seed dispersal for plant recruitment in tropical
forests: Interactions within the seedscape. Biotropica 45: 666–681.
Berens DG, Griebeler EM, Braun C, Chituyi BB, Nathan R, Böhning-Gaese K (2013) Changes
of effective gene dispersal distances by pollen and seeds across successive life stages in a
tropical tree. Oikos 122: 1616–1625.
Berryman A. (1991) Stabilization or regulation: what it all means!. Oecologia 86: 140–143.
Blount ZD, Barrick JE, Davidson CJ, Lenski RE (2012) Genomic analysis of a key innovation in
an experimental Escherichia coli population. Nature 489: 513–518.
Budde KB, Gonzalez-Martinez SC, Hardy OJ, Heuertz M (2013) The ancient tropical rainforest
tree Symphonia globulifera L. f (Clusiaceae) was not restricted to postulated Pleistocene refugia
in Atlantic Equatorial Africa. Heredity 111: 66–76.
Bugmann H. (2001) A review of forest gap models. Climatic Change 51:259–305.
Carneiro FS, Lacerda AE, Lemes MR, Gribel R, Kanashiro M, Wadt LH, et al. (2011) Effects of
selective logging on the mating system and pollen dispersal of Hymenaea courbaril L.
(Leguminosae) in the Eastern Brazilian Amazon as revealed by microsatellite analysis. Forest
Ecology and Management 262:1758–1765.

64

Carneiro FD, Degen B, Kanashiro M, de Lacerda AE, Sebbenn AM (2009) High levels of pollen
dispersal detected through paternity analysis from a continuous Symphonia globulifera
population in the Brazilian Amazon. Forest Ecology and Management 258: 1260–1266.
Chudnoff M (1980) Tropical timbers of the world. Madison: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
831 p.
Clark DA, Clark DB (1994) Climate-induced annual variation in canopy tree growth in a Costa
Rican tropical rain forest. Journal of Ecology 82: 856–872.
Condit R, Ashton PS, Manokaran N, LaFrankie JV, Hubbell SP, Foster RB (1999) Dynamics of
the forest communities at Pasoh and Barro Colorado: comparing two 50-ha plots. Phil. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. 354: 1739–1748.
Connell JH (1978) Diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs. Science 199: 1302–1310.
Corlett T, Primack R (2010) Tropical rain forests: An ecological and biogeographical
comparison. Blackwell Science Ltd., West Sussex, UK pp33–75.
Da Silva EF, de Oliveira CA, Lins-e-Silva AC, Rodal MJ (2008) Diversity and genetic structure
of naturally fragmented populations of Tapirira guianensis Aubl. in Northeaster Brazil.
Bioremediation, Biodiversity and Bioavailability 2: 35–40.
Degen B, Bandou E, Caron H (2004) Limited pollen dispersal and biparental inbreeding in
Symphonia globulifera in French Guiana. Heredity 93: 585–89.
Figueroa-Esquivel EM, Puebla-Olivares F, Eguiarte LE, Nunez-Farfan J (2010) Genetic structure
of a bird-dispersed tropical tree (Dendropanax arboreus) in a fragmented landscape in Mexico.
Revista Mexciana de Biodiversidad 81: 789–800.
Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (FRIM) (1993) Distribution of Tree Species in the Fifty
Hectare Research Plot at Pasoh Forest Reserve. Selangor Darul Ehsan: FRIM. 454pp
Gaveau DL, Sloan S, Molidena E, Yaen H, Sheil D, Abram NK, et al. (2014) Four decades of
forest persistence, clearance and logging in Borneo. PLOS ONE ( 9):e101654.
Gentry AH (1988) Changes in plant community diversity and floristic composition on
environmental and geographical gradients. Annals of Missouri Botanical Garden 75: 1–34.
Ghazoul J (2005) Pollen and seed dispersal among dispersed plants. Biological Reviews 80:
413–443.
Gill GE Jr., Fowler RT, Mori SA (1998) Pollination biology of Symphonia globulifera
(Clusiaceae) in Central and French Guiana. Biotropica 30: 139–144.

65

Grimes A, Loomis S, Jahnige P, Burnham M, Onthank K, Alarcón R, et al. (1994) Valuing the
rain forest: the economic value of nontimber forest products in Ecuador. Royal Swedish
Academy of Sciences 23: 405-410.
Guariguata MR, Arias-Le Claire H, Jones G (2002) Tree seed fate in a logged and fragmented
forest landscape, Northeastern Costa Rica. Biotropica 34: 405–415.
Hamilton MB (1999) Tropical tree gene flow and seed dispersal. Nature 401: 129–130.
Hartl DL, Clark AG (1997) Principles of population genetics. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates.
pp 257–287.
Haymes KL, Fox GA (2012) Variation among individuals in cone production in Pinus palustris
(Pinaceae). American Journal of Botany 99: 640–545.
Hill JK, Gray MA, Khen CV, Benedick S, Tawatao N, Hamer KC, et al. (2011) Ecological
impacts of tropical forest fragmentation: how consistent are patterns in species richness and
nestedness?. Phil.Trans. R. Soc. B. 366:3265–3276.
Huth A, Ditzer T (2001) Long-term impacts of logging in a tropical rain forest—a simulation
study. Forest Ecology and Management 142: 33–51.
Jennings S, Brown N, Boshier D, Whitmore T, Lopes J (2001) Ecology provides a pragmatic
solution to the maintenance of genetic diversity in sustainably managed tropical rain forests.
Forest Ecology and Management 154: 1–10.
Kashimshetty Y, Simkins M, Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2012) Founder placement and gene
dispersal affect population growth and genetic diversity in restoration plantings of American
chestnut. In: Caliskan M, editor. Genetic Diversity in Plants. Shanghai: InTech Press. pp 375–
390.
Kettle CJ (2014) Fragmentation genetics in tropical ecosystems: from fragmentation genetics to
fragmentation genomics. Conservation Genetics 15: 1265–1268.
Kircher J (2011) Tropical Ecology. Princeton University Press. New Jersey USA. pp-6, 79–100,
154–188.
Köhler P, Ditzer T, Huth A (2000) Concepts for the aggregation of tropical tree species into
functional types and the application to Sabah’s lowland rain forests. Journal of Tropical Ecology
16: 591–602.
Korfanta NM, Newmark WD, Kauffman MJ (2012) Long-term demographic consequences of
habitat fragmentation to a tropical understory bird community. Ecology 93: 2548–2559.

66

Landsberg JJ, Sands P (2011) Modelling tree growth: concepts and review. In: Physiological
ecology of forest production: Principles, Processes and Models. Burlington: Academic Press
Elsevier Inc. pp 221–240.
Laurance WF, Sayer J, Cassman KG (2014) Agricultural expansion and its impacts on tropical
nature. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 29: 107–116.
Laurance WF, Useche DC, Rendeiro J, Kalka M, Bradshaw CJ, Sloan SP, et al. (2012) Averting
biodiversity collapse in tropical forest protected areas. Nature 489: 290–294.
Laurance WF, Goosem M, Laurance SG (2009) Impacts of roads and linear clearings on tropical
forests. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24: 659–669.
LauranceW(1999) Reflections on the tropical deforestation crisis. Biological Conservation.
91:109–117.
Liu J, Ashton PS (1995) Individual-based simulation models for forest succession and
management. Forest Ecology and Management 73: 157–175.
Lowe AJ, Boshier D, Ward M, Bacles CF, Navarro C (2005) Genetic resource impacts of habitat
loss and degradation; reconciling empirical evidence and predicted theory for neotropical trees.
Heredity 95: 255–273.
Nathan R, Schurr FM, Spiegel O, Steinitz O, Trakhtenbrot A, Tsoar A (2008) Mechanisms of
long-distance seed dispersal. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23: 638–647.
Metcalf C, Horvitz C, Tuljapurkar S, Clark D (2009) A time to grow and a time to die: a new
way to analyze the dynamics of size, light, age, and death of tropical trees. Ecology 90: 2766–
2778.
Myers N (1988) Threatened biotas: “hot spots” in tropical forests. Environmentalist 8:187–208.
Paul J, Budd C, Freeland J (2013) Conservation genetics of an endangered orchid in eastern
China. Conservation Genetics 14: 195–204.
Pearce D, Putz FE, Vanclay JK (2003) Sustainable forestry in the tropics: panacea or folly?
Forest Ecology and Management 172: 229–247.
Pelikan S, Heywood S, Rogstad SH (2015) Weed suppression success can depend on removal
pattern and gene dispersal distance: Modeling callery pear. Weed Science. 63.3-703-709.
Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2013) NEWGARDEN: a computer program to model the population
dynamics and genetics of establishing and fragmented plant populations. Conservation Genetics
Resources 5: 857–862.

67

Putz F, Sist P, Fredericksen T, Dykstra D (2009) Reduced-impact logging: Challenges and
opportunities. Forest Ecology and Management. 256: 1427–1433.
Quesada M, Herrerias-Diego Y, Lobo JA, Sanchez-Montoya G, Rosas F, Aguilar R (2013)
Long-term effects of habitat fragmentation on mating patterns and gene flow of a tropical dry
forest tree, Ceiba aesculifolia (Malvaceae: Bombacoideae). American Journal of Botany 11:
1095–1101.
Reisch C, Bernhardt-Romermann M (2014) The impact of study design and life history traits on
genetic variation of plants determined with AFLPs. Plant Ecology 215: 1493–1511.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan s (2013a) Plant species restoration: effects of different founding patterns on
sustaining future population size and genetic diversity. Sustainability 5: 1304–1316.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan s (2013b) Monitoring endangered species populations: Gene dispersal can
have pronounced effects on the relationship between census size and genetic diversity. American
Journal of Plant Sciences 4: 1932–1937.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2011) Genetic diversity in establishing plant populations: Founder
number and geometry. Enfield: Science Publishers. 360 pp.
Rosa IM, Ahmed SE, Ewers RM (2014) The transparency, reliability and utility of tropical
rainforest land-use and land-cover change models. Global Change Biology 20: 1707–1722.
Rumana R, Langenfeld-Heyser R, Finkeldey R, Polle A (2009) Functional anatomy of five
endangered tropical species of the family Dipterocarpaceae. Trees 23: 521–529.
Schulke B, Waser NM (2001) Long-distance pollinator flights and pollen dispersal between
populations of Delphinium nuttallianum. Oecologia 127: 239–245.
Sist P, Mazzei L, Blanc L, Rutishauser E (2014) Large trees as key elements of carbon storage
and dynamics after selective logging in the Eastern Amazon. Forest Ecology and Management.
318: 103–109.
Soares-Filho BS, Nepstad DC, Curran LM, Cerqueira GC, Garcia RA, Ramos CA, et al. (2006)
Modelling conservation in the Amazon basin. Nature. 440:520–523.
Soria-Carrasco V, Gompert Z, Comeault AA, Farkas TE, Parchman TL, Johnston JS, et al.
(2014) Stick Insect Genomes Reveal Natural Selection’s Role in Parallel Speciation Science
344:738–742.
Vanclay JK (2003) Realizing opportunities in forest growth modeling. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research 33: 536–541.

68

Vinson CC, Kanashiro M, Harris SA, Boshier DH (2015) Impacts of selective logging on
inbreeding and gene flow in two Amazonian timber species with contrasting ecological and
reproductive characteristics. Molecular Ecology 24: 38–53.
Ward M, Dick CW, Gribel R, Lowe AJ (2005) To self, or not to self. . .a review of outcrossing
and pollen mediated gene flow in neotropical trees. Heredity 95: 246–254.
West TA, Vidal E, Putz FE (2014) Forest biomass recovery after conventional and reducedimpact logging in Amazonian Brazil. Forest Ecology and Management 314: 59–63.
Zanella CM, Bruxel M, Paggi GM, Goetze M, Buttow MV, Cidade FW, et al. (2011) Genetic
structure and phenotypic variation in wild populations of the medicinal tetraploid species
Bromelia antiacantha (Bromeliaceae). American Journal of Botany 98: 1511–1519.
Zhao L, Saelao P, Jones CD, Begun DJ (2014) Origin and Spread of de Novo Genes in
Drosophila melanogaster populations. Science 343:769–772.

69

Figures

Fig. 1 Spatial logging patterns showing 10% total deforestation of a 500 ha fragment (in grey).
Fragment is 2.23 km or 160 grid points on a side. Diagram is approximately to scale. a =
Corners, b = Road, c = Central Square, d = 4Squares, e = 3Strips, f = Strip. Additionally,
selective logging was also performed representing a 10% removal of only those individuals
belonging to the highest age classes.

70

Fig. 2 Mean population growth in the entire fragment across 600 generations. Trials varied in
gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen) and spatial logging patterns. Groups labelled A-I
indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition, with similar growth trajectories and
endpoints. Labelled in group descending order of mean population size after 600 bouts of
mating: Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far,
‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the probability of offspring
and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a particular distance frame relative to a
pistillate individual (for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4 Table); A = NONP; B = NOEP; C =
NOFP; D = EONP; E = EOEP; F = EOFP; G, H, I = FONP, FOEP, FOFP. For a complete list of
logging pattern and gene dispersal condition for each trial above, see S1 Appendix.

71

Fig. 3 Mean population size for the entire fragment after 600 bouts of mating. Trials varied in
spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen). Groups labelled A-I
indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition in descending order of mean
population size. Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’
= Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the probability of
offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to, or being received from, a particular distance frame
relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4 Table). A = NONP; B =
NOEP; C = NOFP; D = EONP; E = EOEP; F = EOFP; G = FONP; H = FOEP; I = FOFP.
“Control” refers to un-logged fragment, and “Selective Logging” refers to 10% removal of only
those individuals belonging to the highest age-classes.

72

Fig. 4 Mean population size after 600 bouts of mating for recovery regions (all logged areas
combined). Trials varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal conditions (offspring and
pollen). Groups labelled A-I indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition in
descending order of mean population size: Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows:
‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer
to the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a
particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more details see S1 Fig. and S4
Table). A = NONP; B = NOEP; C = NOFP; D = EONP; E = EOEP; F = EOFP; G = FONP; H =
FOEP; I = FOFP. “Control” refers to un-logged fragment, and “Selective Logging” refers to
10% removal of only those individuals belonging to the highest age classes.

73

Fig. 5 Mean founding allele retention after 600 generations for recovery regions (all logged areas
combined). Trials varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal conditions (offspring and
pollen). Groups labelled A-I indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition in
descending order of mean population size: Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated as follows:
‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer
to the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a
particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4
Table): A = NOEP; B = NONP; C = NOFP; D = EONP; E = EOEP; F = EOFP; G = FONP; H =
FOEP; I = FOFP. “Control” refers to un-logged fragment, and “Selective Logging” refers to 10%
removal of only those individuals belonging to the highest age class.

74

Fig. 6 Mean Fit for trials across 600 bouts of mating in the entire fragment. Trials varied in
spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen). Groups labelled 1–4
indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition, with similar growth trajectories and
endpoints. In group descending order of mean Fit levels: Gene dispersal condition is abbreviated
as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and
‘Far’ refer to the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from
a particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail S1 Fig. and S4
Table); 1 = FONP; 2 = EONP; EOFP; NOFP; NONP; 3 = FOEP, EOEP, NOEP; 4 = FOFP. For a
complete list of logging pattern and gene dispersal condition for each trial above, see S1
Appendix.

75

Supplementary figures and tables

S1 Fig. Nested offspring and pollen dispersal distance frames around a hypothetical offspringproducing individual (“x”) selected for mating. This individual can be situated anywhere in the
500 ha fragment. The following distances are relative to individual “x” in the x and y direction: a
= 32 grid points or 448 m, b = 64 grid points or 896 m, c = 96grid points or 1344 m, d = 128 grid
points or 1792 m, e = 160 grid points or 2240 m. Diagram is approximately to scale.

76

S2 Fig. Mean population growth across 600 generations in recovery regions (all logged areas
combined). Trials varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and
pollen). Groups labelled A-I indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition, with
similar growth trajectories and endpoints. In descending order of mean population size: Logging
pattern description is followed by gene dispersal condition abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near,
‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the
probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a particular
distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4 Table); A =
NONP, B = NOEP, C = NOFP, D = EONP, E = EOEP, F = EOFP, G = FONP, FOEP, FOFP.
For a complete list of logging pattern and gene dispersal condition for each trial above, see S1
Appendix.

77

S3 Fig. Mean founding allele retention after 600 bouts of mating in the entire fragment. Trials
varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen). Groups
labelled A-I indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition in descending order of
mean population size: Logging pattern description is followed by gene dispersal condition
abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring,
‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or
being received from a particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail
see S1 Fig. and S4 Table); A = NONP, B = NOEP, C = NOFP, D = EONP, E = EOEP, F =
EOFP, G = FONP, H = FOEP, I = FOFP. “Control” refers to un-logged fragment, and “Selective
Logging” refers to 10% removal of only those individuals belonging to the highest age classes.

78

S4 Fig. Mean Fit after 600 bouts of mating in the entire fragment. Trials varied in spatial logging
patterns and gene dispersal conditions (offspring and pollen). Groups labelled 1–9 indicate trials
grouped according to descending order of mean population, with spatial logging patterns in the
legends appearing from left to right within each gene dispersal scenario: Gene dispersal
conditions are abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ =
Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the probability of offspring and/or pollen being
dispersed to or being received from a particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual
(for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4 Table); 1 = FONP, 2 = EOFP, 3 = EONP, 4 = NOFP, 5 =
NONP, 6 = FOEP, 7 = EOEP, 8 = NOEP, 9 = FOFP. “Control” refers to un-logged fragment,
and “Selective Logging” refers to 10% removal of only those individuals belonging to the
highest age classes.

79

S5 Fig. Mean Fit across 600 bouts of mating for recovery regions (all logged areas combined).
Trials varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen
dispersal). Group 1 indicates trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition, with similar
growth trajectories and endpoints. In descending order of mean population size: Logging pattern
description is followed by gene dispersal condition abbreviated as follows: ‘N’ = Near, ‘E’ =
Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the probability
of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a particular distance frame
relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4 Table); 1 = FONP. For a
complete list of logging pattern and gene dispersal condition for each trial above, see S1
Appendix.

80

S6 Fig. Mean Fit after 600 bouts of mating for recovery regions (all logged areas combined).
Trials varied in spatial logging patterns and gene dispersal distance (offspring and pollen).
Groups labelled 1–9 indicate trials grouped according to gene dispersal condition in descending
order of mean population: Gene dispersal conditions are abbreviated as follows, with spatial
logging pattern in the legend appearing from left to right within each gene dispersal scenario: ‘N’
= Near, ‘E’ = Equal, ‘F’ = Far, ‘P’ = Pollen, ‘O’ = Offspring, ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to
the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a particular
distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (S1 Fig. and S4 Table); 1 = FONP, 2 = FOFP, 3
= FOEP, 4 = NOFP, 5 = EOFP, 6 = EONP, 7 = EOEP, 8 = NONP, 9 = NOEP. “Control” refers
to un-logged fragment, and “Selective Logging” refers to 10% removal of only those individuals
belonging to the highest age classes.
Supplementary Tables

81

S1 Table Similarities and differences between NEWGARDEN (NG) and other forest growth
models including stand models, process-based models, empirical models, gap models and hybrid
models.
Similarities between NEWGARDEN (NG) and
other forest growth models: stand models,
process-based models, empirical models, gap
models and hybrid models (Pelikan and
Rogstad 2013; Landsberg and Sands 2011;
Rogstad and Pelikan 2011; Bugmann 2001; Liu
and Ashton 1995)

Differences between NEWGARDEN (NG) and
other forest growth models: stand models,
process-based models, empirical models, gap
models and hybrid models (Pelikan and
Rogstad 2013; Rogstad and Pelikan 2011)

1. Individual-based (like some process-based, gap
and hybrid models).

1. NG is not process-based (Physiological
processes such as photosynthesis is not explicitly
modeled).

2. Spatially-explicit (similar to later gap models
where location is explicitly modeled).

2. NG does not have population growth specified
by a growth equation.

3. Seeks to predict short and long-term dynamics
of the forest in response (e.g. population growth)
to different biotic or abiotic variables.

3. NG is driven by explicit life-history events
which are specified by age-specific probabilities,
e.g., mating, mortality, offspring and pollen
dispersal.

4. Has a method to describe reproduction,
dispersal, recruitment, establishment, growth and
mortality.

4. Spatial interactions are explicitly modeled by
NG. E.g., offspring and pollen dispersal,
reproduction, immigration.
5. NG currently models single species.
6. NG has no direct parameters for modeling
abiotic variables such as climate, but the effects of
these on life-history traits like age-specific
reproduction, gene dispersal genetic diversity, and
mortality can be modeled.
7. NG can model gap and non-gap situations.
8. NG is capable of high levels of replication of
computer simulations allowing for robust
statistical analyses.
9. NG explicitly calculates and monitors
population growth, genetic diversity levels, and

82

population genetic statistics such as Fst and Fit of
the population through time.
10. NG can model spatial and temporal
heterogeneity in the geography of the preserve
being modeled.
11. NG can model a range of genetic histories
such as presence of self- incompatibility alleles
and inbreeding depression in the founders.
12. NG can model different mating systems
ranging from bisexual to dioecious, as well as
agamospermy and different levels of selfing.

S2 Table Age-specific rates of reproduction and pollen provisioning for the control equilibrium
population.
Age
0
139
140
168
196
216
236
268
295
365
396
425
426

Offspring production rate (r)
0.00
0.00
0.50
2.50
7.80
7.80
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
6.00
0.00

83

Pollen production
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.60
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.75
0.00

S3 Table Age-specific mortality rate for the control equilibrium population.
Age
0
6
11
26
51
76
101
151
201
251
301
401
425
426

Mortality Rate
0.25
0.25
0.14
0.0075
0.0085
0.0095
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

S4 Table Offspring and pollen dispersal distance dimensions. Distance frame dimensions and
selection probabilities for offspring and pollen dispersal distance from or to (respectively) an
offspring-producing individual in a given mating event for the “Equal”, “Near” and “Far” gene
dispersal categories.
Distance Distance frame dimensions in
frame
x or y direction in grid points
(gp) and maximum meters
(m)

Probability of
dispersing
offspring for
‘Equal
Offspring’ and
receiving pollen
for ‘Equal
Pollen’.

Probability of
dispersing
offspring for
‘Near
Offspring’ and
receiving pollen
for ‘Near
Pollen’.

Probability of
dispersing
offspring for
‘Far Offspring’
and receiving
pollen for ‘Far
Pollen’.

a

0-32 gp or 448 m

0.20

0.80

0.05

b

32 – 64 gp or 896 m

0.20

0.05

0.05

c

64 – 96 gp or 1,344 m

0.20

0.05

0.05

d

96 -128 gp or 1,792 m

0.20

0.05

0.05

e

128 – 160 gp or 2,240 m

0.20

0.05

0.80

84

S1 Appendix - Supplementary Information for Chapter 3
This appendix contains detailed methods which further elaborate on how the NEWGARDEN
program functions and the life-history characteristics of the simulated population. It also
contains supporting information from the results section as well the complete figure legends
from figures 2 and 6, and the supporting figures S2 Fig. and S5 Fig.

Methods

Control Equilibrium Population

Age-class distribution
Size-class distribution of the initial founding population was based on field data on S. globulifera
obtained from a study by Carneiro et al. 2009. This distribution was converted to corresponding
age classes based on average growth rates reported from studies at Pasoh Forest Reserve,
Malaysia, with growth rates ranging from 2 to 4 mm per year for seedlings and juveniles, and
roughly 4 to 7 mm/year for mature ages (Condit et al. 1999), averaged across numerous TLRF
tree species. During simulations, NG would randomly assign founders ages according to this
derived age-class distribution. As only those plants with a DBH of greater than 15cm were
censused in (Carneiro et al. 2009) to model the younger size classes, size class distribution data
from a canopy species (Cynometra malaccensis Meeuwen (Fabaceae)) in Pasoh Forest Reserve,
Malaysia, was used to create a representative distribution (FRIM 1993). Tropical climax species
have been reported to have size class distributions which have fewer and fewer individuals in

85

each successive size class (Jennings et al. 2001; FRIM 1993). Thus, lower size classes make up
the largest portion of the population and thereby significantly impact resulting demographic and
genetic establishment patterns (Alvarez-Buyalla et al. 1996).

Mortality
In NG, users can specify age-specific rate of mortality for the developing population. In addition
to this method of ‘dying’, individuals may “die”, meaning they are removed from subsequent
censuses used to generate output statistics if: they are dispersed off the fragment; two individuals
land on the same grid point, after which one of them is randomly selected to establish while the
other is removed; an individual is randomly selected to be removed according to the specified
mortality rate; an individual tries to establish on an occupied grid point; or if an ovule fails to be
pollinated due to lack of an eligible pollen donor (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011).
We used age-specific mortality curves representing long-lived canopy tree species
described by Metcalf et al. 2009 in La Selva, Costa Rica (Metcalf et al. 2009). In summary,
representative patterns followed a “bath-tub” shaped curve, with much higher mortality rates at
younger ages (Augspurger and Kitajima 1992), and mortality diminishing to the lowest levels at
the “juvenile” stage. Thereafter, mortality rates increase slightly and plateau at intermediate
ages, and finally decline at the onset of senescence (Metcalf et al. 2009).

Results

Founding allele retention – Entire fragment

86

Founding allele retention in the entire fragment and the recovery region was maximized for the
‘Near’ offspring dispersal conditions (Groups A-C; S3 Fig. and Fig. 5), followed by ‘Equal’
dispersal (Groups D-F; S3 Fig. and Fig. 5) and ‘Near’ (Groups G-I; S3 Fig. and Fig. 5). For the
entire fragment and recovery regions, when offspring dispersal distance was constant, groups
were arranged starting with ‘Near’ pollen, followed by ‘Equal’ and ‘Far’ pollen respectively (S3
Fig. and Fig. 5).

Founding allele retention – Recovery region

A two-way ANOVA showed that offspring dispersal explained a greater amount of variance in
mean founding allele retention for the recovery regions (mean variance of 92.9%), relative to
pollen dispersal (4.2%) and the interaction (1.0%).

Mean observed heterozygosity – Entire fragment

(As this output was not as sensitive to variations in gene dispersal condition and logging pattern
as was founding allele retention, we used the latter as a measure for genetic diversity. Following
are general details for this output).
Variations in gene dispersal condition and logging pattern yielded more or less ‘high’
mean Ho values, ranging from 0.831 to 0.931 in the entire fragment. Trials with ‘Near’ offspring
and ‘Far’ pollen dispersal had the lowest mean Ho compared to all other gene dispersal groups.
Throughout the 600 generations, this particular gene dispersal condition follows a markedly

87

decreasing Ho trajectory, with an increasing trend for Fit, indicating possible effects of moderate
levels of population subdivision for this gene dispersal group.

Mean observed heterozygosity – Recovery Region

In the combined logged areas, mean Ho levels ranged from 0.819 to 0.926. ‘Near’ offspring and
‘Far’ pollen dispersed trials showed a declining Ho trajectory and endpoints compared to all other
trials, similar to trends seen in the entire fragment. This gene dispersal group also had increasing
Fit levels reaching moderate population differentiation.

Figure legends in full

Fig. 2 In descending order of mean population size after 600 bouts of mating in the entire
fragment: Logging pattern description is followed by gene dispersal condition abbreviated as
follows: ‘N’= Near, ‘E’= Equal, ‘F’=Far, ‘P’=Pollen, ‘O’= Offspring , ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’
refer to the probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a
particular distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S1 Fig. and S4
Table). Group A= NONP (6= Control NONP, Y= Strip NONP, e= Corner NONP, w= CentralSq
NONP, n= Road NONP, F= 4Squares NONP, P= 3Strips NONP), 3= Control NOEP; Group B=
NOEP (b= Corner NOEP), >= Selective Logging NONP; Group B= NOEP (k= Road NOEP, M=
3Strips NOEP, V= Strip NOEP, t= CentralSq NOEP, C= 4Squares NOEP), *= Selective Logging
NOEP; Group C= NOFP (9= Control NOFP, z= CentralSq NOFP, S= 3Strips NOFP, J=

88

4Squares NOFP, h= Corner NOFP, q= Road NOFP, $= Strip NOFP, != Selective Logging
NOFP); Group D= EONP (5= Control EONP, X= Strip EONP, O= 3Strips EONP, d= Corner
EONP, m= Road EONP, E= 4Squares EONP, v= CentralSq EONP) , 2= Control EOEP, <=
Selective Logging EONP; Group E= EOEP (L= 3Strips EOEP, U= Strip EOEP, a= Corner
EOEP, s= CentralSq EOEP, j= Road EOEP, B= 4Squares EOEP, &= Selective Logging EOEP);
Group F= EOFP (8= Control EOFP, y= CentralSq EOFP, R= 3Strips EOFP, p= Road EOFP, H=
4Squares EOFP, g= Corner EOFP, #= Strip EOFP, @= Selective Logging EOFP); Group G,H,I
= FONP, FOEP, FOFP (A= CentralSq FOFP, N= 3Strips FOEP, x= CentralSq FONP,7= Control
FONP, G= 4Squares FONP, o= Road FONP, 4= Control FOEP, Q= 3Strips FONP, Z= Strip
FONP, u= CentralSq FOEP, l= Road FOEP, D= 4Squares FOEP, r= Road FOFP, f= Corner
FONP, W= Strip FOEP, c= Corner FOEP, ?= Selective Logging FONP, = = Control FOFP, +=
Selective Logging FOEP, T= 3Strips FOFP, K= 4Squares FOFP, i= Corner FOFP, %= Strip
FOFP, 1= Selective Logging FOFP).

Fig. 6 In descending order of mean Fit levels after 600 bouts of mating in the entire fragment:
Logging pattern description is followed by gene dispersal condition abbreviated as follows: ‘N’=
Near, ‘E’= Equal, ‘F’=Far, ‘P’=Pollen, ‘O’= Offspring , ‘Equal’, ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ refer to the
probability of offspring and/or pollen being dispersed to or being received from a particular
distance frame relative to a pistillate individual (for more detail see S4 Table and S1 Fig.);
Group 1= FONP (?= Selective Logging FONP, 7= Control FONP, Q= 3Strips FONP, f= Corner
FONP,O= Road FONP, Z= Strip FONP, G= 4Squares FONP, x= CentralSq FONP); Group 2=
EONP, EOFP, NOFP, NONP (<= Selective Logging EONP, R= 3Strips EOFP, H= 4Squares
EOFP, g= Corner EOFP, @= Selective Logging EOFP, #= Strip EOFP, E= 4Squares EONP, v=

89

CentralSq EONP, m= Road EONP, 8= Control EOFP, $= Strip NOFP, X= Strip EONP, O=
3Strips EONP, y= CentralSq EOFP, p= Road EOFP, h= Corner NOFP, d= Corner EONP, 9=
Control NOFP, q Road NOFP, 5= Control EONP, != Selective Logging NOFP, S= 3Strips NOFP,
J= 4Squares NOFP, >= Selective Logging NONP, z= CentralSq NOFP, P= 3Strips NONP,F=
4Squares NONP, w= CentralSq NONP, 6= Control NONP, Y= Strip NONP, n= Road NONP, e=
Corner NONP); Group 3= FOEP, EOEP, NOEP (+= Selective Logging FOEP, u= CentralSq
FOEP, 4= Control FOEP, 2= Control EOEP, &= Selective Logging EOEP, W= Strip FOEP, N=
3Strips FOEP, U= Strip EOEP, L= 3Strips EOEP, D= 4Squares EOEP, B= 4Squares EOEP, s=
CentralSq EOEP, l= Road FOEP, a= Corner EOEP, 3= Control NOEP, *= Selective Logging
NOEP, V= Strip NOEP, C= 4Squares NOEP, k= Road NOEP, j= Road EOEP, c= Corner FOEP,
b= Corner NOEP, M= 3Strips NOEP, t= CentralSq NOEP; Group 4=FOFP (A= CentralSq
FOFP, 1= Selective Logging FOFP, r= Road FOFP, i= Corner FOFP, = = Control FOFP, T=
3Strips FOFP, %= Strip FOFP, K= 4Squares FOFP).

S2 Fig. Group A = NONP (F= 4Squares NONP, P= 3Strips NONP, w= CentralSq NONP, n=
Road NONP); Group B= NOEP (C= 4Squares NOEP, M= 3Strips NOEP, k= Road NOEP, t=
CentralSq NOEP), Y= Strip NONP, J= 4Squares NOFP, V= Strip NOEP, e= Corner NONP, b=
Corner NOEP; Group C= NOFP (h= Corner NOFP, q= Road NOFP, $= Strip NOFP, S= 3Strips
NOFP); Group D= EONP (v= CentralSq EONP, O= 3Strips EONP, m= Road EONP, E=
4Squares EONP); Group E= EOEP (s= CentralSq EOEP, L= 3Strips EOEP, j= Road EOEP, B=
4Squares EOEP), X= Strip EONP, D= Corner EONP, z= CentralSq NOFP, U= Strip EOEP, a=
Corner EOEP; Group F= EOFP (R= 3Strips EOFP, y= CentralSq EOFP, H= 4Squares EOFP,
p= Road EOFP, #= Strip EOFP, g= Corner EOFP); Group G= FONP, FOEP, FOFP (f= Corner

90

FONP, c= Corner FOEP, Z= Strip FONP, W= Strip FOEP, i= Corner FOFP, A= CentralSq FOFP,
N= 3Strips FOEP, %= Strip FOFP, o= Road FONP, l= Road FOEP, x= CentralSq FONP, G=
4Squares FONP, Q= 3Strips FONP, r= Road FOFP, D= 4Squares FOEP, u= CentralSq FOEP, K=
4Squares FOFP, T= 3Strips FOFP

S5 Fig. Group 1= FONP (f= Corner FONP, Q= 3Strips FONP, Z= Strip FONP, G= 4Squares
FONP, o= Road FONP, x= CentralSq FONP), z= CentralSq NOFP, A= CentralSq FOFP, T=
3Strips FOFP, K= 4Squares FOFP, N= 3Strips FOEP, D= 4Squares FOEP, u= CentralSq FOEP,
y= CentralSq EOFP, r= Road FOFP, S= 3Strips NOFP, l= Road FOEP, R= 3Strips EOFP, p=
Road EOFP, H= 4Squares EOFP, W= Strip FOEP, c= Corner FOEP, J= 4Squares NOFP, d=
Corner EONP, X= Strip EONP, E= 4Squares EONP, m= Road EONP, O= 3Strips EONP, v=
CentralSq EONP, e= Corner NONP, #= Strip EOFP, t= CentralSq NOEP, Y= Strip NONP, L=
3Strips EOEP, F= 4Squares NONP, g= Corner EOFP, P= 3Strips NONP, s= CentralSq EOEP, w=
CentralSq NONP, n= Road NONP, j= Road EOEP, M= 3Strips NOEP, B= 4Squares EOEP, U=
Strip EOEP, k= Road NOEP, a= Corner EOEP, C= 4Squares NOEP, i= Corner FOFP, q= Road
NOFP, b= Corner NOEP, $= Strip NOFP, V= Strip NOEP, h= Corner NOFP, %= Strip FOFP

91

References
Alvarez-Buyalla ER, Garcia-Barrios R, Lara-Moreno C, Martinez-Ramos M (1996). Demographic
and genetic models in conservation biology: applications and perspectives for tropical rain forest
tree species. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 27: 387-421.
Augspurger C, Kitajima K (1992) Experimental studies of seedling recruitment from contrasting
seed distributions. Ecology 73: 1270-1284.
Bugmann H. (2001) A review of forest gap models. Climatic Change 51:259–305.
Carneiro FD, Degen B, Kanashiro M, de Lacerda AE, Sebbenn, AM (2009) High levels of pollen
dispersal detected through paternity analysis from a continuous Symphonia globulifera population
in the Brazilian Amazon. Forest Ecology and Management 258: 1260-1266.
Condit R, Ashton PS, Manokaran N, LaFrankie JV, Hubbell SP, et al. (1999) Dynamics of the
forest communities at Pasoh and Barro Colorado: comparing two 50-ha plots. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B 354: 1739-1748.
Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (FRIM) (1993) Distribution of Tree Species in the Fifty
Hectare Research Plot at Pasoh Forest Reserve. Selangor Darul Ehsan: FRIM. 454pp.
Jennings S, Brown N, Boshier D, Whitmore T, Lopes J (2001) Ecology provides a pragmatic
solution to the maintenance of genetic diversity in sustainably managed tropical rain forests.
Forest Ecology and Management 154: 1-10.
Metcalf C, Horvitz C, Tuljapurkar S, Clark D (2009) A time to grow and a time to die: a new way
to analyze the dynamics of size, light, age, and death of tropical trees. Ecology 90: 2766-2778.
Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2013) NEWGARDEN: a computer program to model the population
dynamics and genetics of establishing and fragmented plant populations. Conservation Genetics
Resources 5: 857–862.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2011) Genetic diversity in establishing plant populations: Founder number
and geometry. Enfield: Science Publishers. 360 pp.
Landsberg JJ, Sands P (2011) Modelling tree growth: concepts and review. In: Physiological
ecology of forest production: Principles, Processes and Models. Burlington: Academic Press
Elsevier Inc. pp 221–240.
Liu J, Ashton PS (1995) Individual-based simulation models for forest succession and
management. Forest Ecology and Management 73: 157–175.

92

Chapter 4
Effective seed harvesting strategies for the ex situ genetic diversity conservation of rare tropical
tree populations
Abstract
Tropical rain forests harbor a high diversity of tree species, a large portion of which are
considered rare and threatened by anthropogenic factors such as land-use change. Addressing
the global need for ex situ rescue populations of such species, we investigated whether certain
methods of wild-source seed collection harvest greater amounts of genetic variation from the
source population while minimizing the costs expended. We used an individual-based computer
program (NEWGARDEN) to conduct simulation trials examining which aspects of seed
procurement provided the most cost-effective methods for maximal rare allele capture for single
isolated populations of rare tropical tree species. Aspects examined included the geometric
pattern of harvesting, location of seed collections within the spatial distribution of the population
(central vs. peripheral), geometric partitioning of sampling regions (contiguous vs. subdivided),
gene dispersal distance, cost of collection (path length traversed), and ratio of seeds collected to
plants sampled. Results demonstrated that the ratio of seeds collected to plants sampled highly
impacted the number of alleles preserved relative to sampling location or geometric pattern of
collection, explaining 82% and 79% of the variance, respectively. Collecting from subdivided
peripheral sampling regions and populations having long distance gene dispersal led to increases
of up to 39% and 51% in the amount of genetic variation conserved respectively. These results
suggest that ex situ conservation efforts for rare tropical trees can benefit by collecting fewer
seeds from a larger sample of trees, collecting from peripheral subdivided sampling regions of
the population rather than a contiguous centrally located one when using the transect or nearest
neighbor pattern of collection, and taking note of the dispersal biology of the source population.
93

It highlights the need for more information regarding the dispersal characteristics of the target
species and also demonstrates the value of predictive modeling studies for planning seed
collection projects.

Introduction

Tropical lowland rain forests (TLRF’s) contain the highest diversity of tree species in the world,
a large fraction of which are considered rare (Connell 1978; Wright 2002; Becerra 2015). For
example, over one third of the tree species in the Brazilian Amazon are considered rare with
population sizes of less than one thousand individuals >10 cm DBH (Hubbell et al. 2008). This
diversity is under threat from persisting rates of deforestation and fragmentation which,
combined with factors such as lack of resources and infrastructure necessary for conserving
ecosystems, make in situ conservation of many species problematic (Rodriguez et al. 2011;
Hoban and Schlarbaum 2014; Kettle 2014; Owiny et al. 2016). In addition, tropical trees can be
long-lived resulting in extended cycles of renewal and replacement, making in situ conservation
more difficult and expensive for species with complex demographies (Lieberman et al. 1985; Li
and Pritchard 2009). In such cases ex situ conservation, which involves in situ collecting of
seeds or vegetative material from source populations for re-introduction elsewhere, can be
effective in preventing immediate species extinctions from current habitat threats (Li et al. 2002;
Caujapé-Castells and Pedrola-Monfort 2004).
In general, ex situ collection strategies have been less explored for rare TLRF tree
species, which have different ecologies than their temperate counterparts in terms of their
population densities, diversity in gene dispersal mechanisms and distances (due to the existence

94

of many different guilds of offspring dispersers and pollinators), mating systems, life-spans and
mortality patterns, among other characteristics (Bawa, 1974; Hartsthorn, 1980; Clark et al. 2005;
Comita et al. 2014). The large number of rare tropical tree populations makes it important that
ex situ genetic conservation methods be developed for such species to conserve as many of them
as possible (Brown and Briggs 1991; Mijangos et al. 2014;).
One of the main goals of ex situ conservation is for seed collections to capture maximal
genetic variation from the populations of target species so that future reintroduction populations
can better adapt to factors such as climate change, competition from invasive species, pathogen
attacks, and population bottlenecks (Brown and Marshall 1995; Li et al. 2002; Blanc-Jolivet and
Degen 2014; Taharin et al. 2015). The amount of genetic diversity captured from source stands
can be influenced by the ratio of seeds collected per plant and plants sampled (Hoban and Strand
2015). Previous theoretical studies based upon probability equations on genotype and allele
frequency distributions offer differing guidelines regarding seed harvesting methods, but
ultimately suggest collecting a few seeds from a large number of individuals as opposed to
collecting seeds in bulk from a few individuals (Brown and Hardner 2000) For example,
Lawrence et. al (1995) suggest that collecting one seed from each of 172 individuals would be
sufficient in conserving at a 95% probability, at least one copy of each source population allele
with a frequency of > 0.05, across all loci. Other guidelines usually fall into various ranges of
collecting from between 10 to 100 plants (e.g. see Table 1 in Hoban and Strand 2015). For
example, for crop germplasm collections, Brown and Marshal (1995) propose collecting from
between 30 to 50 individuals. For endangered temperate populations, the recommended number
is between 10 and 50, while for species capable of clonal propagation it is 25 (Brown and Briggs
1991; Brown and Hardner 2000; Blanc-Jolivet and Degen 2014; Guerrant 2014).

95

Not all studies elaborate on how many seeds should be collected per plant to sufficiently
harvest genetic diversity. Available recommendations range from simply collecting a similar
number of seeds per plant, 1 seed per each of 172 individuals (Lawrence et al. 1995) , 2 to 8
seeds from each of 25 to 30 plants in a population with moderate population genetic structure
(Hoban and Schlarbaum 2014), 10 seeds from each of 30 plants having low selfing rates and
long-distant dispersal (Hoban and Strand 2015), a total of 1,000 seeds from 10 to 50 plants
(Brown and Briggs 1991; Brown and Marshall 1995;), a total of 1,500 to 3,000 seeds from 10 to
50 individuals per population (Wieland 1993), or simply not more than 20% of the total fruit
crop of any given plant (Broadhurst et al. 2008). Additionally, findings from a recent study by
Hoban and Strand (2015) found that the number of plants that needed to be sampled increased
for selfing plants and those with shorter gene dispersal, thus highlighting the importance of
accounting for life-history traits of the target species when planning ex situ collection trials.
They also determined that, under their trial conditions, random tree sampling strategy was more
thorough at harvesting genetic variation relative to more biased methods, thus indicating that the
geometric pattern of collection can be one of the key components of seed collection design to
consider.
Our study aimed to build upon previous studies and examine different aspects of ex situ
seed collection specifically for rare tropical trees. Of additional interest to us was to examine
another spatial aspect of seed harvesting: how the relative location of seed collection within the
spatial distribution of the population (e.g. peripheral vs. central), would influence the level of
genetic diversity captured from the population, as genetic edge effects (increased loss of alleles)
have been known to occur in regions near population borders (Benitez-Malivdo 1998; Rogstad
and Pelikan 2011). If collecting at population edges was equally effective, the cost of travelling

96

to central regions of the distribution of the population could be eliminated. Furthermore, how
did the geometric partitioning of sampling regions for a single population (e.g. contiguous vs.
subdivided sampling regions of equal cumulative area) affect the genetic diversity conserved?
We considered these issues as potentially important since the interplay between factors such as
offspring and pollen dispersal kernels could impact patterns of genetic diversity distribution
throughout the population (Ghazoul et al. 1999; Mimura et al. 2009).
Ex situ conservation can also be a labor-intensive and expensive process, and thus needs
to be optimized to avoid under- or over-sampling (Guerrant et al. 2004; Normah et al. 2013).
Additionally, a quantitative assessment of the costs associated with different patterns of seed
collecting (e.g. in terms of path lengths travelled) relative to the amount of genetic variation
harvested, is lacking from previous research, and yet assessing such a cost to benefit ratio may be
of primary concern in developing plant conservation projects (Hoban and Strand 2015).
In this study, our specific aims were to: 1) quantitatively test which ratios of seeds
collected to plants sampled, and 2) geometric patterns of collection were more efficient in
harvesting genetic diversity from the source population; 3) determine whether the efficiency of
ex situ seed collections was affected by genetic edge effects by testing variable collection
strategies at peripheral versus central locations within the spatial distribution of the population;
4) compare the effectiveness of harvesting seeds in contiguous versus subdivided sampling
regions; 5) examine how the path lengths traversed varied for two geometrically different
collection patterns (random versus nearest neighbor) to provide comparisons of the trade-off
between cost expended and genetic variation captured; and 6) test the relative importance (via
ANOVA) of the seed collecting methodologies tested on the level of genetic variation harvested
to determine which aspects of ex situ seed collections were most important in designing ex situ

97

projects. The results from this study were intended for isolated populations of endemic rare
TLRF tree species existing in a single, small population of approximately one thousand mature
individuals, which may be a common rain forest pattern (Hubbell et al. 2008), under short and
long-distant offspring and pollen dispersal scenarios. We hypothesized that varying the ratio of
seeds collected to plants sampled, geometric pattern of collection, gene dispersal distances,
sampling location, and/or contiguity of sampling regions would differentially harvest genetic
diversity from the source population and result in variable costs of procurement effort expended
across different trials. To test these hypotheses, we conducted comparative theoretical computer
simulations, with population characteristics designed predominantly based on data from the
literature, using the computer program (NEWGARDEN; Rogstad and Pelikan 2011), which
models natural plant population development while assessing population growth and genetic
diversity dynamics (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011; Kashimhsetty et al. 2012; Pelikan and Rogstad
2013; Rogstad and Pelikan 2013a&b; Kashimshetty et al. 2015; Pelikan et al. 2015).

Methods

NEWGARDEN Virtual population generation overview
NEWGARDEN is a single species, individual-based, spatially explicit population development
simulation program allowing user-defined life history traits, preserve features and initial
population conditions to be modeled (Kashimshetty et al. 2012; Kashimshetty et al. 2015;
Pelikan et al. 2015). Population characteristics that can be specified include the number, spatial
location, and age distribution of the initial population; number of loci and the population genetic

98

diversity; age-specific offspring production, pollen production and mortality; selfing rate; and
offspring and pollen dispersal distances, among other population characteristics, conditioned
among eligible individuals in each age class according to the Poisson distribution as appropriate.
Preserve characteristics such as size, shape, presence/absence of corridors, immigration rates,
carrying capacity, etc. can also be designated. For additional details on NG parameters, see S2
Appendix.
Each set of user-defined initial input conditions constitutes one trial, and the user can
specify the number of replicate-run analyses to be performed for any given trial, the results of
which provide means and standard deviation output values for statistical comparisons of the
effects of differing trial conditions. Output values used here include: 1) population size, 2)
number of founding alleles retained, 3) observed heterozygosity, and 4) Fit values describing
population subdivision and/or inbreeding levels. By designing comparative trials where one key
variable (e.g., offspring dispersal distance) is altered while all other parameters are held constant,
the effects of alternate population characteristics on resulting population growth and genetic
diversity dynamics can be assessed (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011; Rogstad and Pelikan 2013a).

Parameters held constant across trials

Control Equilibrium Population
We modeled rare TLRF tree species with total population sizes of approximately 1,000
individuals (> 10cm DBH; Hubbell et al. 2008). Initial control populations generated with NG
were created to be at approximate demographic equilibrium at the time of seed harvesting so that
we could then sample “stable” populations with various collection strategies to compare the

99

number of alleles collected and effort expended. Control populations for both gene dispersal
distance treatments, Near and Far offspring and pollen dispersal were thus generated (see below
for more details).
To simulate rare TLRF tree population demographics, we used field data from the 52-ha
plot in Lambir National Park located in Malaysia (CTFS 2015). We identified all tree species
with a population density < 0.7 individuals/ha to capture tree species approximately below the
upper limit of the density range for rare species (definitions for rare TLRF tree species vary in
the literature, ranging from <0.01 to 1 mature individual/ha; Gaston 1994; Hmeljevski et al.
2008) and compiled age-size class distributions for them (see Methods-S2 Appendix). Of the
total 1,192 Lambir species, there were 143 meeting these criteria with an average density of 0.4
individuals/ha. From this initial population based on average demographic characteristics of rare
TLRF tree species, we generated a NG population that was at demographic equilibrium (not
changing in size; Berryman 1991) based upon the average age-class structure compiled earlier
(see above), having 1,220 to 1,270 (under near versus far gene dispersal, respectively)
reproductive individuals (with DBH >10cm) constant through 1,000 bouts of mating (see S2
Appendix for more details). These equilibrium populations were created by adjusting agespecific reproduction and mortality rates within realistic ranges (S2 Appendix). Details of the
user-specified traits of control equilibrium populations for near and far gene dispersal are
outlined below.

Preserve characteristics
Equilibrium populations were maintained in a 10km x 10km preserve with a low density of
reproductive individuals at approximately 0.125 individuals/ha. The NG spatial preserve system

100

is a Cartesian grid (x and y coordinates). This preserve was surrounded by two additional
different buffer zones with lower carrying capacities. The first internal buffer zone had a width
of 2.5km on each side with 50% of the grid points being available for establishment, and the
second buffer zone (surrounding the first) had a width of 2.5 km on each side with 20% of the
grid points being available for establishment (S1 Fig.). The initial and equilibrium populations
for both Near and Far gene dispersal trials had 3,000 individuals of all age classes (including
approximately 1,220 to 1,270 reproductives) randomly distributed in the 10 x 10km preserve by
NG. For further details on parameter input details on preserve characteristics, age-specific
mortality, age-specific offspring and pollen production and complete lack of selfing in the
equilibrium populations, see Methods in S2 Appendix.

Loci and allelic variation
Using the number of rare alleles in population as an indicator of genetic diversity has been found
to be a more sensitive and tractable measure of genetic variation than observed heterozygosity
(Allendorf and Luikart 2007; Rogstad and Pelikan 2011). Rare alleles, which are produced by
different processes such as genetic drift, selection, de novo mutation, etc., are important for
conservation purposes as they are easily lost compared to the more common alleles, and can be
important under changing circumstances (e.g., Blount et al. 2012; Soria-Carrasco et al. 2014;
Zhao et al. 2014; Yinegar et al. 2015). Additionally, it has been suggested that much of the
genetic variation found in rare species can be in the form of rare alleles (frequencies < 0.05), and
thus ex situ collections would do best to account for these in their sampling strategies
(McGlaughlin et al. 2015). Studies have also shown that a more rapid loss in the number of rare
alleles in a population can be indicative of increased variance in the frequencies of the more

101

common alleles, making populations less susceptible to natural selection and more to genetic
drift (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011). Loss of common alleles in small populations is also unlikely,
making them of less interest to conservation efforts. Thus, here we focus on monitoring changes
in the number of rare alleles. In this study, populations had 20 loci, with every locus having 100
alleles, each at a frequency of 0.01.

Parameters that varied among trials

Gene dispersal scenario
In order to test contrasting gene dispersal distance scenarios, two realistic dispersal distributions
were used, one reflecting near offspring and pollen dispersal (Near), and the other far offspring
and pollen dispersal (Far). Details on offspring and pollen dispersal distribution kernels, and
how these are implemented in NG, are given in S2 Appendix.

Seed Collection
The NG Seed Collection (SC) module enables the user to explore how different seed collecting
modalities can affect allele capture and effort expended. The program collects seeds from NG
stands generated as outlined above, with the user defining, in comparative trials, the number of
seeds to be collected per individual, the number of plants to be sampled, the sampling area, the
geometric partitioning of sampling area (contiguous vs. subdivided; internal vs border), and the
geometric pattern of collection (e.g. random, transect, nearest neighbor; see below). For details
on how these conditions are implemented using SC, see Seed Collection in S2 Appendix. SC
also tracks the distance travelled throughout the seed collection and generates a path length

102

output for that particular trial (for more details, see S2 Appendix). Thus, by comparing path
lengths between differing trials, it is possible to determine the more cost-effective collection
strategies.

Geometric pattern of collection
Three different geometric patterns of seed harvesting were used: 1) Random (individuals are
sampled randomly in the specified area), 2) Transect (starting from the lower left of the specified
area, sampling occurs along a horizontal transect of specified width in the direction towards the
opposite border with doubling back until all seeds have been collected), and 3) Neighbor (one
initial individual is selected at random to sample from, after which harvesting continues from each
subsequent nearest neighbor). Details on how these methods are implemented in NG are in Seed
Collection in S2 Appendix). Once specified, a given seed collection trial strategy can be re-run for
a pre-designated number of replicates for any given set of NG trials allowing means with standard
deviations to be calculated for seed collection output values. Replicate sampling is described
below.
While the calculation of path lengths is straightforward for the Random and Neighbor
methods, computing a path length for the Transect strategy is more complex due to the high
variability resulting from its implementation (Burnham et al. 1980). Thus, path lengths are only
reported for the Random and Neighbor strategies. We would generally expect that for an
efficiently designed Transect methodology the path lengths would most likely fall somewhere
between the path lengths of the two other extremes used here, Random and Neighbor.

103

Ratio of seeds collected/Plants sampled (RSP)
In order to test seed collection recommendations made by previous studies as reviewed above, we
tested six different RSPs. The total number of 176 was chosen to test a number close to Lawrence’s
et al.’s (1995) recommendation of 172, and also to have a number that could be divided into
different seed collection numbers and obtain whole integers of trees to sample. RSPs tested were
as follows: 1) 1 seed from each of 176 individuals (1x176); 2) 2 seeds from each of 88 individuals
(2x88); 3) 4 seeds from each of 44 individuals (4x44); 4) 11 seeds from each of 16 individuals
(11x16); 5) 8 seeds from each of 22 individuals (8x22); and 6) 44 seeds from each of 4 individuals
(44x4). For the remainder of the paper the lowest RSP corresponds to 1x176 while the highest
RSP corresponds to 44x4.

Sampling location
The Sampling location and geometric partitioning of sampling area scenarios tested were as
follows (total sampling areas were equal): a) Border: four squares each placed at the four corners
of the ‘preserve’ and sized 2.25 km (450 grid points) on a side; b) 100m In: four squares each
placed 100m (20 grid points) from the perpendicular sides of each corner; c) 500m In: four squares
placed 500m (100 grid points) from the perpendicular sides of each corner; and d) Center: one
contiguous sampling area placed in the center of the ‘preserve’ sized 4.5 km (900 grid points) on
a side (Fig. 1; details of sampling area size determination in S2 Appendix).

Statistical Analyses
Each NG population trial had 30 replicate runs. Rare tropical tree populations were generated
using NG for all combinations of Gene dispersal scenarios (Near versus Far offspring and pollen

104

dispersal) and Sampling locations where seeds were sampled (Border, 100m In, 500m In, and
Center), resulting in a total of 10 NG trials (e.g. Near-Border, Far-100m In, etc.; Fig. 2). For each
NG population generated, six different Ratio of seeds collected/Plants sampled (RSP; 1x176, 2x88,
4x44, 11x16, 22x8, and 44x4) were applied in three different Geometric pattern of seed collections:
Random, Transect, and Neighbor (Fig. 2). Thus, each of the 10 populations developed in NG
(differing in Gene dispersal scenario and Sampling location; e.g. Near-Border, Near-500m In etc.)
were subject to 18 different seed collection scenarios, resulting in a total of 180 treatments (e.g.
Near–Border–1x176–Random). Output generated from the seed collection module included: 1)
total number of seeds collected, 2) number of alleles preserved, 3) observed heterozygosity, 4) Fit
values, and 5) collection path length (km; Random and Neighbor only). Output values were
averaged over the 30 replicate trial runs with 20 replicate seed collection runs per replicate trial to
generate means and standard deviation ranges for the output for each seed harvesting scenario.
Three sets of two-factor ANOVA’s were performed on the following sets of variables to
test the relative importance of variables in accounting for variance in the number of alleles
preserved across different treatments, and whether any two variables had any interactive effects
on this output: 1) RSP vs. Geometric pattern of collection; 2) RSP vs. Sampling location; and 3)
RSP vs. Gene dispersal scenario. P-values were Bonferroni corrected to account for multiple
comparisons. One-factor ANOVAs were performed to determine if groups of a single variable
were significantly different. These analyses to determine whether mean values differed were
Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons. When comparing the number of alleles preserved
between two trials, unpaired two-tailed T-tests were used (p-values Bonferroni corrected).

105

Results

Ratio of seeds collected/Plants sampled – (RSP)

RSP had a significant effect on the number of alleles preserved from the simulated populations
across different Sampling locations, Gene dispersal scenarios and Geometric patterns of
collection. The magnitude of genetic diversity harvested increased with a progressive increase in
number of seeds collected from a smaller sample of plants (Fig. 3). The RSP that captured the
greatest level of source population genetic variation was collecting 1 seed from each of 176 trees
(e.g., 1 x 176; Fig. 3), capturing 92 to 95% of the alleles across different Gene dispersal
scenarios, Geometric patterns of collection and Sampling locations. Under all treatments of
Gene dispersal scenarios, Geometric patterns of collection, and Sampling location, intermediate
RSPs (e.g., 2 seeds from each of 88 trees, 4 seeds from each of 44 trees and 11 seeds from each
of 16 trees) harvested 82 to 92% (2x88), 67 to 89% (4x44) and 43 to 82% (11x16) of the alleles
from the source population (e.g., Fig. 3). The RSP that resulted in the least amount of alleles
being captured was collecting 44 seeds from each of 4 trees, conserving 27 to 71% of the source
population alleles across different Gene dispersal scenarios, Geometric patterns of collection,
and Sampling locations (e.g., 44x4; Fig. 3).
The difference between the two most extreme RSPs (i.e., 1x176-Neighbor vs. 44x4Neighbor; Fig. 3) in the number of alleles captured was 71.0% (T-test p<0.0001, t=264.8,
df=35). Lower RSPs (e.g., 1x176, collecting fewer seeds from more individuals) significantly
improved the capture of source population alleles across all other variables tested (One-factor

106

ANOVAs across different RSPs for all Gene dispersal scenarios, Sampling locations and
Geometric patterns of collection, p<0.002; e.g. Fig. 3 & 4).

Two-factor ANOVA results
RSP explained the greatest amount of variance in the number of alleles harvested compared to
Sampling location, accounting from between 82.0% (p<0.0083, F=26119.16, df=5, NeighborFar) and 99.7% of the variance (p<0.0083, F=62048.22, df=5, Random-Near) across different
Geometric patterns of collection and Gene dispersal scenarios (e.g. Fig. 4).
RSP also accounted for the most variance in genetic diversity harvested compared to
Gene dispersal scenario, explaining between 68.1% (p<0.004, F=7696.60, df=5, 500m In-Far)
and 84.6% of the variance (p<0.004, F=31092.91, df=5, Center-Neighbor), across variable
Sampling locations and Geometric patterns of collection (e.g. Fig. 5). In other words, the most
important issue (based on all the different variables tested) to consider in collecting seeds to
conserve the greatest amount of genetic diversity is lowering the RSP.

Sampling location

Sampling from subdivided versus contiguous regions
At higher RSPs (e.g., 22x8, 44x4; Fig. 4), sampling in the contiguous sampling region in the
Center of the spatial distribution of the population significantly captured less allelic diversity
than collecting from subdivided regions (of the same cumulative area) located closer to the
border, for many seed collection trials using the Neighbor and Transect methodologies. This
pattern was especially evident and statistically significant for Neighbor under Near dispersal

107

(one-factor ANOVAs across different Sampling location s for all RSPs, p<0.001; e.g. Fig. 4) and
Far dispersal (data not shown) except for trials sampling 1 seed from each of 176 trees where the
genetic diversity captured between the Center and peripheral subdivided areas (i.e. Border, 100m
In, 500m In) did not statistically differ under Far dispersal. For example, collecting 44 seeds
from each of 4 trees located 500m In compared to the Center, using the Neighbor strategy under
Near dispersal, lead to a 39% increase (t-test p<0.0001, t=51.93, df=58) in the number of alleles
harvested (Fig. 4).
Using Transect under Near and Far dispersal while collecting at the Center also
significantly preserved less number of alleles relative to collections made at the subdivided
peripheral sampling locations (one-factor ANOVAs across different Sampling locations for all
RSPs, p<0.001; data not shown), except for two cases when collections were made using the
1x176 and 44x4 ratios under Near dispersal in which the genetic diversity captured between
Border and Center locations did not significantly vary.
When collections were made using the Random method under Near gene dispersal, the
pattern of higher levels of genetic diversity preservation in the Center compared to subdivided
peripheral locations was not significant (S3 Fig.). This was also true under Far dispersal for
Random, except for the 2x88 and 4x44 ratios where this pattern was not statistically significant
(one-factor ANOVAs across different Sampling locations for all RSPs, p<0.001, data not
shown).
In summary, the geometric partitioning of the sampling region (i.e., contiguous vs.
subdivided) became more important to the number of alleles harvested when using the Neighbor
and Transect strategy for Near and Far dispersal.

108

Sampling location: Border vs. Inset. vs. Central
Near dispersal
The Sampling location treatment that overall significantly captured the greatest amount of
genetic diversity from the source population under Near dispersal was 500m In, especially under
Neighbor and Transect methodologies for higher RSPs (one-factor ANOVAs across different
Sampling locations for all RSPs, p<0.001; e.g. 22x8; Fig. 4). For example, collecting at a
location inset 500m In from the border significantly harvested 39% more alleles than sampling in
the Center using the Neighbor method (see 44x4, S3 Fig.). However the main difference in
alleles harvested was between 500m In and Center since the difference in genetic diversity
procured between peripheral subdivided regions (e.g. Border, 100m In, 500m In) was not
biologically meaningful (<4% difference).
Under the Random strategy, the percent difference in the number of alleles harvested
between Sampling locations was not was not biologically meaningful (i.e. < 4%) across different
RSPs (S3 Fig.).

Far dispersal
Under Far dispersal, collecting at a distance of 100m In from the border maximally captured
genetic variation for Random, however the alleles harvested between all Sampling locations was
not biologically meaningful (less than 4% difference). Under the Neighbor strategy, collecting at
an inset distance of 100m In also harvested the highest number of alleles, with the main
differences (up to 25%) being between 100m In and Center, especially at higher RSPs (e.g.,
44x4; one-factor ANOVAs across different Sampling locations for all RSPs, p<0.001, data not
shown). Collecting at a distance of 500m In maximized allele capture under the Transect method

109

(one-factor ANOVAs across different Sampling locations for all RSPs, p<0.001, data not
shown). However, the main increase in alleles harvested was between 500m In (up to 8%
increase) and Center.

Two-factor ANOVA results
Sampling location explained less variance in number of alleles preserved than RSP, explaining
<0.1% (p<0.0083, F=30.46, df=3, Random-Near) to 11.3% of the variance (p<0.0083,
F=5917.08, df=3, Neighbor-Far), while the interaction of the two variables explained <0.1%
(p<0.0083, F=8.35, df=15, Random-Far) to 5.5% of the variance (p<0.0083, F=578.20, df=15,
Neighbor-Far) across different Geometric patterns of collection and Gene dispersal scenarios
(e.g. Fig. 4).
With respect to the variance that was accounted for by Sampling location, more was
explained when sampling with the Neighbor method (e.g. 11.3% of the variance, p<0.0083,
F=5917.08, df=3, Far) compared to Transect (3.82% explained, p<0.0083, F=277.57, df=3, Far)
or Random (0.3% explained, p<0.0083, F=187.61, df=3, Far), across Gene dispersal scenarios.
In other words, the Sampling location within the spatial distribution of the population was more
important when using the Neighbor methodology.

Gene Dispersal Scenario

Populations with Near offspring and pollen dispersal generally secured fewer alleles compared to
Far (e.g. Fig. 5, T-tests within each RSP, p<0.0006; but see the few exceptions noted below).

110

This pattern became more evident as RSPs increased (Fig. 5). The highest percent difference in
alleles conserved between any given trials differing in dispersal distance was 50.1%, with Far
dispersal capturing more alleles than Near (Neighbor-Center, 44x4; Fig. 5). This trend of Far
dispersal leading to greater number of alleles harvested compared to Near was also apparent
across Sampling locations (e.g. Border, 100m In, 500m In), and Geometric patterns of collection
(T-tests p<0.0006; data not shown), except for a few cases using the 1x176 ratio where the
number of alleles captured was very similar between Gene dispersal scenarios (see Results-Gene
Dispersal Scenario in S2 Appendix). The dispersal characteristics of the target population thus
took on greater importance in determining how much genetic diversity was captured when more
seeds were sampled from fewer trees (higher RSPs, e.g., Fig. 5).

Two-factor ANOVA results
Gene dispersal scenario did not explain as much variance in the number of alleles recovered
compared to RSP, explaining between 9.0% (p<0.004, F=15614.06, df=1, 500m In-Random) and
22.1% of the variance (p<0.004, F=30759.97, df=1, 100m In-Neighbor) across Sampling
locations and Geometric patterns of collection (e.g. Fig. 5). The interaction of Gene dispersal
scenario and RSP also accounted for less variance than RSP alone, explaining between 8.06%
(p<0.0001, F=152.54, df=5, Center-Far) and 11.25% of the variance (p<0.004, F=3660.06, df=5,
100m In-Random).

111

Geometric pattern of collection

The Geometric pattern of collection that generally procured the highest number of alleles was
Random followed by Transect and then Neighbor across all RSPs, for a given Sampling location
and Gene dispersal scenario (e.g., Fig. 3). This pattern was not as distinct for the 1x176 ratio but
was especially evident and significant for most of the cases where intermediate RSPs were used
(e.g., 11x16, 22x8, Fig. 3; One-factor ANOVAs across different Geometric patterns of collection
for all RSPs, Gene dispersal scenarios and Sampling locations unless otherwise stated, p<0.001;
see Results-Geometric pattern of collection in S2 Appendix for details). For example, there was
a 43% difference in the alleles recovered between Random and Neighbor when collecting at the
Center under Near dispersal for the 11x16 ratio (Fig. 3). However, using different Geometric
patterns of collection did not result in significant differences in alleles conserved when sampling
with the 44x4 RSP from the peripheral subdivided sampling locations compared to the
contiguous Center. Thus, Geometric pattern of collection was more important when collecting
at the Center compared to peripheral locations (see further details in Sampling location results
section).

Two-factor ANOVA results
Geometric pattern of collection explained less variance in alleles preserved than RSP across
different Sampling locations and Gene dispersal scenarios, between 3.2% (p<0.0063, F=664.35,
df=2, 500m In-Far) and 14.1% of the variance (p<0.0063, F=2520.91, df=2, Center-Far), while
the interaction of the two variables explained between 1.7% (p<0.0063, F=80.75, df=10, BorderFar) and 6.0% of the variance (p<0.0063, F=214.68, df=10, Center-Far). With respect to the

112

variance accounted for by Geometric pattern of collection, more was explained when sampling
occurred in the Center compared to the subdivided peripheral locations.

Cost of ex situ collections: Path length

Using the Random strategy for any given RSP generated the highest path lengths, relative to the
Neighbor strategy across different Sampling locations (Fig. 3). When lower RSPs were used
(e.g., 1x176, 2x88), the Random and Neighbor strategies harvested similar numbers of alleles,
although using the Random method caused a ten-fold increase in path length traversed compared
to Neighbor (e.g., Fig. 3 & 7). On the other hand, despite having shorter path lengths for
Neighbor compared to Random at higher RSPs (e.g., 22x8, 44x4), there was also a sharp
reduction in number of alleles harvested for Neighbor compared to Random (e.g., Fig. 7 & S4
Fig.).
Path lengths (km) were greatest when fewer seeds were collected from more trees (lower
RSPs, e.g., 1x176; Fig. 6). When the Geometric pattern of collection was constant (e.g.
Random), there was a progressive decline in path length needed to complete seed collections as
the RSPs increased (Fig. 6). This was true across different Sampling locations, Gene dispersal
scenarios and Geometric patterns of collection (note that path lengths for Transect were not
calculated, see Methods for details).
Sampling using the Random strategy generated significantly longer path lengths at the
Center relative to subdivided peripheral locations (i.e. Border, 100m In, 500m In) across different
RSPs (e.g. S3 Fig.; One-factor ANOVAs across path lengths for different Sampling locations for
all RSPs and Gene dispersal scenarios, p<0.001), ranging from 336 km for low RSPs (i.e., 1x176),

113

to 10 km for higher RSPs (e.g. 44x4), across both dispersal kernels. This pattern of higher path
lengths for sampling in the Center relative to other subdivided peripheral locations for a given RSP
was not apparent under the Neighbor strategy, the path lengths of which ranged from 100 km for
the 1x176 ratio down to less than 5 km for 44x4 (e.g. Fig. 4). Under the Random method, for any
given RSP, there was no significant difference in path lengths between different subdivided
peripheral sampling locations across dispersal cases (e.g. S3 Fig.), which ranged from 181 km for
the 1x176 ratio to < 1 km for 44x4. As expected, the path lengths for Near and Far dispersed
populations were similar across all treatments and were not statistically different (e.g. Fig. 5).
Across all trials here, observed heterozygosity and Fit values did not vary in a
biologically significant manner across different variables and will not be discussed further (see
S2 Appendix).

Discussion

We quantitatively tested how effectively different modes of seed collection from isolated rare
tropical tree populations (with approximately 1,000 reproductive individuals) having Near versus
Far gene dispersal, harvested genetic diversity. The results suggest that the variables tested are
important to consider for ex situ seed collection efforts as altering them often made marked
differences in the genetic variation preserved from the source populations.

114

Ratio of seeds collected/Plants sampled (RSP)

Overall, the variable that had the largest impact on how much source population genetic diversity
was captured was RSP. Alterations in this variable caused the highest level of variance in the
number of alleles harvested. Generally, the collection of a large number of seeds from each of a
small set of trees harvested less genetic variation than sampling a smaller quantity of seeds from
each of a larger number of trees, findings similar to that reported by Hoban and Strand (2015),
although here we tested collecting fewer seeds from more individuals (their maximum number of
individuals sampled was 36; for a more detailed comparison of our study to that of Hoban and
Strand 2015, see S1 Table). The recommendation of Lawrence et al. (1995) that sampling 1 seed
from each of 172 individuals would be sufficient in conserving at a 95% probability at least a
single copy of each allele with a frequency of greater than or equal to 0.05, was supported by our
results, here using even lower frequency alleles (freq=0.01, see Loci and Allelic Variation in the
Methods for more details on the use of rare alleles in this study). Using one seed from each of
176 individuals preserved 92 to 95% of these rare alleles from the simulated populations of rare
tropical trees under the broad range of sampling locations, gene dispersal, and harvesting
geometry conditions modeled in this study.

Gene dispersal scenario

Even though RSP had the greatest impact on how much genetic variation was secured, other
variables also produced important effects in some situations. For tree populations simulated
here, possessing relatively short distance offspring and pollen dispersal yielded lower levels of

115

genetic diversity when subjected to identical sampling methods across different harvest strategies
(e.g. variable Geometric patterns of collection), especially when using higher RSPs. Thus,
contrasting gene dispersal kernels can cause significant differences in the genetic variation
conserved, consistent with the results of Hoban and Strand (2015) on the importance of gene
dispersal distance in determining suitable ex situ collection guidelines. These results also
suggest that sampling efforts from populations for which dispersal kernels have been shortened
due to changes in the behavior and abundance of offspring disperses and pollinators resulting
from anthropogenic deforestation may suffer allele harvest reductions compared to collecting
from stands in which longer dispersal distances had persisted, revealing a potential detrimental
consequence of fragmentation of TLRFs. Results here also demonstrate that increased
knowledge of species’ dispersal biology will greatly aid in modeling studies to develop more
optimal seed collection strategies, making field studies investigating life-history issues crucial
(Gustafsson et al. 2016). Future studies should explore other combinations of offspring and
pollen dispersal kernels not examined here, such as long distance offspring dispersal coupled
with short distance pollen dispersal, and vice versa, to account for the broad diversity of
dispersal characteristics existing in the tropics.

Geometric pattern of collection

Using the Random strategy under Near and Far dispersal procured the highest level of genetic
variation followed by Transect and then Neighbor, similar to the results of Hoban and Strand
(2015). This was particularly evident for cases where more seeds were sampled from a smaller
group of trees (high RSPs, e.g., 44x4; Fig. 3), but having a minimal impact when only 1 seed was

116

sampled from each of 176 trees. Additionally, the pattern of collection also became more
important in harvesting allelic diversity when sampling occurred in the contiguous Center
compared to peripheral subdivided regions. For example, sampling using the Neighbor and
Transect strategies at the Center harvested fewer alleles relative to comparative cases where
sampling occurred at peripheral subdivided regions, however this was not the case under the
Random pattern of collection. Therefore, the selection of a geometric pattern of collection in
some cases depends on other factors used, such as the RSP and the Sampling location. Selecting
favorable combinations of these factors can potentially improve the yield of alleles conserved
while reducing the collection costs.

Sampling location

Our results suggest that sampling from a single population using the Neighbor or Transect
strategies in subdivided sampling regions throughout the species’ distribution would harvest
more alleles than would sampling from a contiguous centrally-located sampling region, under
both Near and Far dispersal. This geometric partitioning of sampling regions would ensure that
alleles spread only locally in the spatial distribution of the population would have a greater
chance of being captured. However, changing the Geometric pattern of collection to Random
nullified this outcome, and thus geometric partitioning of sampling regions is generally of
consequence to ex situ collections only when collecting from nearest neighbors or along a
transect (but see Results for qualifications). Thus, the spatial positioning and partitioning of
sampling regions can interact with the Geometric pattern of collection in this type of ex situ
conservation. Furthermore, results indicate that placing the sampling regions at some distance in

117

from the borders of the target species’ spatial distribution would be a more optimal scenario for
maximizing the genetic diversity retention of the source population, as sampling regions placed
100m In and 500m In from the border amassed the highest number of alleles compared to Border
corner placement. However, the difference in alleles captured between subdivided sampling
regions placed at the corners (Border) as opposed to 100m In and 500m In from the border was
low (i.e., < 4%) and thus sampling at the borders in this case would prove to not only harvest
similar levels of genetic diversity but also to avoid the additional cost of travelling inward into
the species’ spatial distribution for seed collection.

Cost of ex situ collections

We used one way to assess the “cost” of harvesting alleles in different sampling scenarios,
namely the ratio of alleles collected to distance travelled for the Random versus Neighbor
sampling strategies. Ideally the desired ex situ sampling design would entail traversing short
distances (i.e. keeping path lengths low) while maximizing allele capture (i.e. points occupying
the upper left region on Fig. 7 & S4 Fig.). The results reveal that when collecting more seeds
from fewer individuals (higher RSPs, e.g., 44 seeds from each of 4 trees) lower effort is required,
in terms of distance travelled (Fig. 7 & S4 Fig.). However, this is not a sound trade-off given
that the percent genetic diversity captured in the seeds can drop to as low as 27.0% when using
higher RSPs (compared to 93.1% at lower RSPs, e.g. 1x176; Fig. 7). Additionally, the trade-off
between genetic variation harvested between different Geometric patterns of collection at lower
RSPs (e.g. 1 seed from each of 176 trees) and the cost expended toward their completion was not
apparent for the Random strategy where the increased effort of collection relative to that
118

expended under Neighbor did not lead to corresponding increases in alleles preserved (Fig. 7 &
S4 Fig.). Thus, using the Neighbor strategy for this case (1x176) would not only maximize
genetic diversity retention but also minimize the cost effort (Fig. 7 & S4 Fig.). However, using
the Neighbor strategy for higher RSPs (e.g. 22 seeds from each of 8 trees) progressively
diminishes the level of genetic diversity harvested from the source population and thus would not
be an optimal strategy to use in such cases (Fig. 3, 7 & S4 Fig.).
Path lengths reported in the study, especially for the Random strategy, may seem
unusually high (e.g. ~336 km) for the purposes of general conservation efforts. This is due to the
low densities of rare tropical tree populations modeled in this study and the large area occupied
by both the population (10km x 10km) and that taken up by the sampling region (4.5km x
4.5km), as well as how sampling a pre-selected random set of points occurs. As expected, longer
path lengths accrued where a relatively large number of trees (e.g., 176 trees) were sampled in a
contiguous sampling region, thus increasing the magnitude of the effort expended.

Conclusions and Recommendations

The results from this study suggest several guidelines that could potentially improve the
efficiency of ex situ collection projects for rare tropical tree species, under the conditions
modeled, as follows:


Modeling ex situ project design can be important since genetic diversity
harvesting can depend on several factors (e.g.,

119

gene dispersal kernel).



Collecting few seeds from each of a large sample of trees (e.g., 1 seed from each
of 176 trees, or 2 seeds from each of 88 trees) would be sufficient in capturing 82
to 95% of the rare alleles from the source population.



Sampling populations with short distance offspring and pollen dispersal will
harvest fewer alleles than those with long distance dispersal, across varying
situations (e.g. differing RSPs, Sampling locations etc.), highlighting the
importance of species’ dispersal biology knowledge.



A Random pattern of collection is the most optimal strategy in terms of alleles
captured (but may not be for effort expended, see below), followed by Transect
and then Neighbor, especially when sampling more seeds from fewer individuals
(higher RSPs, e.g., 44x4).



Sampling in peripheral subdivided regions is a more effective strategy compared
to a contiguous central region under the Neighbor and Transect strategy, as it
secures a greater number of source population alleles.



In-setting the Sampling location into subdivided regions 500m In (under Near
dispersal – Random, Transect or Neighbor; and under Far dispersal – Transect) or
100m In (under Far dispersal - Random or Neighbor) from the border maximizes
allele harvest, however the main increase is between these locations and the
contiguous central region.



When collecting few seeds from a large group of trees (lower RSPs, e.g., 1x176,
2x88) it is more efficient to use the Neighbor methodology as it not only
optimally harvests alleles but also minimizes the distance travelled, unlike the
Random strategy which despite harvesting a high number of alleles, results in

120

longer distance travelled in this situation (Fig. 7 & S4 Fig.). However for higher
RSPs (e.g. 44x4), the Neighbor strategy procures fewer alleles despite having
shorter path lengths to complete trials, which makes the Random strategy the
better method to use in these situations (Fig. 7 & S4 Fig.).

It should be noted that more seeds than suggested by available recommendations might
need to be collected to account for the low success rates often reported from plant reintroduction
populations in terms of survival to flowering and fruiting (Godefroid et al. 2011). Seeds of
TLRF tree species may also be recalcitrant, with loss of vigor due to storage confounding ex situ
collection attempts. However the development of novel germplasm storage techniques such as
cryogenic technologies may lessen deterioration of seeds (Walters et al. 2013; Lang et al. 2014).
These recommendations should also be interpreted in the context of the conditions
modeled here. We tested different aspects of ex situ conservation on a population at genetic and
demographic equilibrium to begin with a simple model where the effects of the variables tested
could be more easily detected to provide an overview of how these different factors might affect
ex situ genetic conservation for rare trees. We understand that populations in nature can have
more complex genetic and life-history characteristics and be developing under more nonequilibrium conditions than modeled here. However programs such as NG can be used to model
allele conservation under many of the numerous possibilities of genetic and demographic
histories, and the methods outlined in this research can be used to explore best conservation
practices for target species where alternative life-history and spatial data are available.
Obtaining field data regarding the demographic distribution and gene flow of target species is
thus crucial to providing more accuracy in this type of modeling research.

121

As the Global Strategy for Plant Conservation recommends that at least 75% of
threatened species be maintained in ex situ collections by 2020 (Cavendar et al. 2015),
quantitative studies such as those performed here can inform efforts towards more efficient and
scientifically-based methods of protecting vulnerable plant species. Many species may be even
rarer than those studied here and NG modeling may reveal different methodologies needed for
such populations. The results here can be used as a starting point for establishing ex situ reserve
stands of rare tropical trees. Given the invaluable biodiversity at stake arising from
anthropogenic habitat degradation, these types of predictive modeling studies can be
instrumental in helping recover and sustain the integrity of such biomes over the long term.
The NEWGARDEN computer program is freely available, with associated materials and
program updates, by agreement with Science Publishers (Enfield, NH) at:
http://math.uc.edu~pelikan/~NEWGARDEN/

References
Allendorf FW, Luikart G (2007) Conservation and the genetics of populations. Blackwell,
London.
Bawa KS (1974) Breeding systems of tree species of a lowland tropical community. Evolution.
28:85-92.
Beccera JX (2015) On the factors that promote the diversity of herbivorous insects and plants in
tropical forests. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112:6098-6103.
Berryman A (1991) Stabilization or regulation: what it all means!. Oecologia 86: 140-143.
Benitez-Malivdo J (1998) Impact of forest fragmentation on seedling abundance in a tropical
rain forest. Conservation Biology. 12:380-389.
Blanc-Jolivet C, Degen B, (2014) Using simulations to optimize genetic diversity in Prunus
avium seed harvests. Tree Genetics & Genomes. 10:503-512.

122

Blount ZD, Barrick JE, Davidson CJ, Lenski RE (2012) Genomic analysis of a key innovation in
an experimental Escherichia coli population. Nature 489: 513-518.
Broadhurst LM, Lowe A, Coates DJ, Cunningham SA, McDonald M, Vesk PA, Yates C (2008)
Seed supply for broadscale restoration: maximizing evolutionary potential. Evolutionary
Applications 1:587-597.
Brown AH, Briggs JD (1991) Sampling strategies for genetic variation in ex situ collections of
endangered plant species. In: Genetics and conservation of rare plants. Oxford Univ. Press, NY
pp 99-118.
Brown AH, Marshall DR (1995) A basic sampling strategy: theory and practice. In: Collecting
plant genetic diversity. Technical guidelines. CAB International, United Kingdom. pp75-91.
Brown AD, Hardner CM (2000) Sampling the gene pools of forest trees for ex situ conservation.
In: Forest conservation genetics: principles and practice. CSIRO publishing, Canberra, pp 185196.
Burnham KP, Anderson DR, Laake JL (1980) Estimation of density from line transect sampling
of biological populations. Wildlife Monographs. 72:3-202.
Caujape-Castells J, Pedrola-Monfort (2004) Designing ex-situ conservation strategies through
the assessment of neutral genetic markers: Application to the endangered Androcymbium
gramineum. Conservation Genetics 5: 131-144.
Cavender N, Westwood M, Bechtoldt C, Donnelly G, Oldfield S, Gardner M, Rae D, McNamara
W (2015) Strengthening the conservation value of ex situ tree collections. Oryx. 49:416-424.
Comita LS, Queenborough SA, Murphy SJ, Eck JL, Kaiyang X, Krishnadas M, Beckman N, Zhu
Y (2014) Testing predictions of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis: a met analysis of experimental
evidence for distance and density-dependent seed and seedling survival. Journal of Ecology. 102:
845-856.
Connell JH (1978) Diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs. Science 199: 1302-1310.
Clark CJ, Poulsen JR, Bolker BM, Connor EF, Parker VT (2005) Comparative seed shadows of
bird-, monkey-, and wind-dispersed trees. Ecology. 86: 2684-2694.
CTFS (2015) http://www.ctfs.si.edu/site/Lambir/census/. Smithsonian Research Institution.
Accessed 1 September 2014.
Guerrant EO, Havens K, Vitt P (2014) Sampling for effective ex situ plant conservation.
International journal of plant sciences. 175:11-20.

123

Guerrant EO, Fiedler PL, Havens K, Maunder M (2004) Revised genetic sampling guidelines for
conservation collections of rare and endangered plants. In: Ex suit plant conservation. Island
press, Washington, pp 419-438.
Gustafsson M, Gustafsson L, Alloysius D, Falck J, Yap S, Karlsson A, Ilstedt U (2016) Life
history traits predict the response to increased light among 33 tropical rainforest tree species.
Forest Ecology and Management. 362:20-28.
Gaston K (1994) Rarity. Springer Inc., NY
Ghazoul J, Liston KA, Boyle TJ (1999) Disturbance-induced density-dependent seed set in
Shorea siamensis (Dipterocarpaceae), a tropical forest tree. Journal of Ecology 86: 462-473.
Godefroid S, Piazza C, Rossi G, Buord S, Stevens A et al. (2011) How successful are plant
reintroductions? Biological Conservation. 144:662-682.
Hartsthorn GS (1980) Neotropical forest dynamics. Biotropica. 12:23-30.
Hmeljevski K, Reis A, Montagna T, dos Reis M (2011) Genetic diversity, genetic drift and mixed
mating system in small subpopulations of Dyckia ibiramensis, a rare endemic bromeliad from
Southern Brazil. Conservation Genetics. 12: 761-769
Hoban S, Strand A (2015) Ex situ seed collections will benefit from considering spatial sampling
design and species’ reproductive biology. Biological Conservation. 187:182-191.
Hoban S, Schlarbaum S (2014) Optimal sampling of seeds from plant populations for ex-situ
conservation of genetic biodiversity, considering realistic population structure. Biological
Conservation. 177: 90-99.
Hubbell SP, Fangliang H, Condit R, Borda-de-Agua L, Kellner J, ter Steege H (2008) How many
tree species are there in the Amazon and how many of them will go extinct? PNAS. 105:1149811504.
Kashimshetty Y, Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2015) Variable gene dispersal conditions and spatial
deforestation patterns can interact to affect tropical tree conservation outcomes. PLoS ONE
10(5): e0127745
Kashimshetty Y, Simkins M, Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2012) Founder placement and gene dispersal
affect population growth and genetic diversity in restoration plantings of American chestnut. In:
Genetic Diversity in Plants. InTech Press, Shanghai, pp 375-390.
Kettle C (2014) Fragmentation genetics in tropical ecosystems: from fragmentation genetics to
fragmentation genomics. Conservation Genetics. 15:1265-1268.
Lang Q, Xia K, Wang X, Liu J, Zhao J, Tan Y (2014) Seed storage behavior of 101 woody
species from the tropical rainforest of southern China: a test of the seed-coat ratio-seed mass

124

(SCR-SM) model for determination of desiccation sensitivity. Australian Journal of Botany. 62:
305-311.
Lawrence MJ, Marshall DF, Davies, P (1995) Genetics of genetic conservation. I. Sample size
when collecting germplasm. Euphytica. 84:89-99.
Li D, Pritchard W (2009) The science and economics of ex situ plant conservation. Trends in
Plant Science. 14: 614-621.
Li Q, Xu Z, He T (2002) Ex situ genetic conservation of endangered Vatica guangxiensis
(Dipterocarpaceae) in China. Biological Conservation. 106:151-156.
Lieberman D, Lieberman M, Hartshorn G, Peralta R (1985) Growth rates and age-size
relationships of tropical wet forest trees in Costa Rica. Journal of Tropical Ecology. 1: 97-109.
Lockwood DR, Richards CM, Volk GM (2007) Probabilistic models for collecting genetic
diversity: Comparisons, caveats and limitations. Crop Science. 47:861-868.
Normah MN, Malik SK, Chaudhury R, Salma I, Makeen MA (2013) Conservation of tropical
fruit genetic resources. In: Conservation of Tropical Plant Species. Springer, New York, pp 137170.
McGlaughlin ME, Riley L, Brandsrud M, Arcibal E, Helenurm MK, Helenurm K(2015) How
much is enough? Minimum sampling intensity required to capture extant genetic diversity in ex
situ seed collections: examples from the endangered plant Sibara filifolia (Brassicaceae).
Conservation Genetics. 16:253-266.
Metcalf C, Horvitz C, Tuljapurkar S, Clark D (2009) A time to grow and a time to die: a new
way to analyze the dynamics of size, light, age, and death of tropical trees. Ecology 90: 27662778.
Mijangos JL, Pacioni C, Spencer PS, Craig MD (2014) Contribution of genetics to ecological
restoration. Molecular Ecology. 24:22-37. doi: 10.1111/mec.12995
Mimura M, Barbour RC, Potts BM, Vaillancourt RE, Watanabe KN (2009) Comparison of
contemporary mating patterns in continuous and fragmented Eucalyptus globulus native forests.
Molecular Ecology 18: 4180-4192.
Owiny, AA (2016) Communities of trees along a tropical forest restoration gradient. Russian
Journal of Ecology. 47:53-61.
Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2013) NEWGARDEN: a computer program to model the population
dynamics and genetics of establishing and fragmented plant populations. Conservation Genetics
Resources 5: 857-862.

125

Pelikan S, Heywood S, Rogstad SH (2015) Weed suppression success can depend on removal
pattern and gene dispersal distance: Modeling callery pear. Weed Science. 63:703-709.
Reisch C, Bernhardt-Romermann M (2014) The impact of study design and life history traits on
genetic variation of plants determined with AFLPs. Plant Ecology. 215:1493-1511.
Rodriguez RR, Gandolfi S, Nave AG, Aronson J, Barreto TE, Vidal CY, Brancalion PH (2011)
Large-scale ecological restoration of high-diversity tropical forests in SE Brazil. Forest Ecology
and Management. 261:1605-1613.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2013a). Monitoring endangered species populations: Gene dispersal can
have pronounced effects on the relationship between census size and genetic diversity. American
Journal of Plant Sciences 4: 1932-1937.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2013b) Plant species restoration: effects of different founding patterns
on sustaining future population size and genetic diversity. Sustainability 5: 1304-1316.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2011) Genetic diversity in establishing plant populations: Founder
number and geometry. Science Publishers, Enfield.
Soria-Carrasco V, Gompert Z, Comeault AA, Farkas TE, Parchman TL, Johnston JS, Buerkle CA,
Feder JL, Schwander T, Egan SP, Crespi BJ, Nosil P (2014) Stick Insect Genomes Reveal Natural
Selection’s Role in Parallel Speciation Science 344:738-742.
Taharin KA, Abdullah MZ, Hashim SS, Sharif AF, Ariff FF (2015) Ex-situ conservation of
Endospermum malaccense (Sesendok): Tree selection, wilding handling and seed germination.
Journal of Tropical Resources and Sustainable Science. 3:39-42.
Walters C, Berjak P, Pammenter N, Kennedy K, Raven P (2013) Preservation of recalcitrant seeds.
Science. 339:915-916.
Wieland GD (1993) Guidelines for the management of orthodox seeds. Center for Plant
Conservation, St. Louis.
Wright SJ (2002) Plant diversity in tropical forests: a review of mechanisms of species coexistence.
Oecologia. 130:1-14.
Yinegar H, Schmidt DJ, Teketay D, Zalucki J, Hughes JM (2015) Gene dispersal inference across
forest patches in an endangered medicinal tree: comparison of model-based approaches. Biological
Journal of the Linnaean Society. 114:887-904.
Zhao L, Saelao P, Jones CD, Begun DJ (2014) Origin and Spread of de Novo Genes in Drosophila
melanogaster populations. Science 343:769-772.

126

Figures

127

Fig. 1 Different Sampling locations: a) Border, b) 100m In, c) 500m In, and d) Center; a-c are
subdivided and d is contiguous.

128

Fig. 2 Experimental design showing the different variables and treatments tested.

129

Fig. 3 Number of alleles preserved across different Ratios of seeds collected/Plants sampled
(RSPs) grouped by Geometric pattern of collection, under Near gene dispersal when sampling
occurred at the Center. Each checkered bar represents the path length traversed (scale to the
right) for the trial just to the left of it (for the Random and Neighbor patterns of collection only).
Transect does not have path length calculations (see Methods and S2 Appendix for details).

130

Fig. 4 Number of alleles preserved across different Ratios of seeds collected/Plants sampled
(RSPs) grouped by Sampling location, under Near gene dispersal using the Neighbor pattern of
collection. Each checkered bar represents the path length traversed (scale to the right) for the trial
just to the left of it.

131

Fig. 5 Number of alleles preserved across different Ratios of seeds collected/Plants sampled
(RSPs) grouped by Gene dispersal scenario, using the Neighbor pattern of collection when
sampling occurred at the Center.

132

Fig. 6 Number of alleles preserved across different Sampling locations, using the Random
pattern of collection for Near gene dispersal. Each checkered bar represents the path length
traversed (scale to the right) for the trial just to the left of it.

133

Fig. 7 Path lengths traversed versus number of alleles preserved for sampling trials conducted at
the Center under Near gene dispersal, labeled with Ratio of seeds collected/Plants sampled and
Geometric pattern of collection (R = Random, symbolized by clear circle, N = Neighbor,
symbolized by black circle). Error ranges may be too small to distinguish for some points on the
graph.

134

Supplementary Figures and Tables

S1 Fig. Dimensions of the spatial distribution of the rare tropical tree population modeled in the
study. The white area represents the core area of the population, while the inner grey buffer zone
(light grey) represents a region where 50% of the sites are viable for establishment. The outer
buffer zone (dark grey) has 20% of the sites viable for establishment.

135

S2Fig. Distance frames where offspring can be dispersed to and from which pollen can be
received, relative to the offspring producing individual located in the middle of the innermost
frame, ‘a’. Dimensions of the distance frames are as follows: a = 60 x 60 m, b = 180 m x 180m,
c = 600 m x 600 m, d = 2000 m x 2000 m and e = 30,000 m x 30,000m. The diagram is to scale.

136

S3 Fig. Number of alleles preserved across different Ratios of seeds collected/Plants sampled
grouped by Sampling locations, under Random pattern of collection, for Near dispersal.
Checkered bars represent the path lengths traversed (scale to the right) for the trial just to the left
of it.

137

S4 Fig. Path length traversed versus number of alleles preserved for sampling trials conducted at
the Center under Far gene dispersal, labeled with Ratio of seeds collected/Plants sampled and
Geometric pattern of collection (R = Random, symbolized by clear circle, N = Neighbor,
symbolized by black circle). Error ranges may be too small to distinguish for some points on the
graph.

138

S1 Table Similarities and differences between our study and that of Hoban and Strand (2015).
Similarities between the study by Hoban and
Strand (2015) and our study

Differences between the study of Hoban and Strand
(2015) and our study

1. Both use spatially-explicit individual-based
computer simulation programs to model the
population genetics and demographic
development of plant populations over time
under different spatial sampling strategies
across different offspring and pollen dispersal
distances of the target species.

1. Our study is focused on testing different aspects of
ex situ seed collections specifically for rare tropical
tree species (i.e. very low density populations) and as
such uses life-history traits for this group of species
taken from the literature.

2. We use Random, Transect and Neighbor
spatial sampling strategies of seed collection,
similar to that of Hoban and Strand’s Random,
Transect and Biased strategies.

2. We test collecting fewer seeds from more
individuals (e.g. 1 seed from each of 176 individuals).
Their maximum number of individuals sampled was
36.

2. Similar life-history traits tested across both
studies include offspring and pollen dispersal.

3. Population development in our study using
NEWGARDEN follows age-specific reproduction, agespecific mortality and age-specific pollen production
schedules whereas population development in Hoban
and Strand’s (2015) study occurs through probabilities
of survival, reproduction, pollen donation, and
transition between discrete life stages.

3. Life-history traits accounted for by both
studies include reproduction, pollen
production, mortality, genotypes of
individuals and mating.

4. We test the effect of the location of the sampling
region relative to the spatial distribution of the
population on the level of ex situ genetic conservation
(i.e. peripheral vs. central) in order to test for genetic
edge effects.

4. We also test different ex situ collection
strategies on a single isolated population,
rather than across several different
populations.

5. Our study also tests the effect of having subdivided
vs. contiguous sampling regions on genetic diversity
preserved by ex situ collections.

5. The research is intended to inform
conservation efforts for preserving the
integrity of the genetic variation for plant
species or populations.

6. We are explicitly testing the relative cost of
different ex situ seed collections in terms of path
length traversed (km) for completing any given
collection trial to better inform conservation planning
efforts.
7. The Transect seed collection strategy in our study
has a stochastic element to it with parameters
describing probabilities of distance intervals and
diameter of collection.

139

S2 Appendix - Supplementary Information for Chapter 4 – This file contains supporting
details from the Methods and Results section.
Methods

NEWGARDEN virtual population generation
NG has a dynamic preserve system capable of simulating gap openings and succession
processes. In NG populations, mortality is simulated among individuals (through several
different ways, see Age specific mortality below for details) as well as randomized establishment
of individuals at grid points through the age-specific reproduction parameter, allowing for the
development of competition for space. It also has new features describing life-history traits such
as direction of pollen movement and offspring dispersal, details on the mating system such as
presence of self-incompatibility, agamospermy, inbreeding depression, and other features
describing the seed bank and immigration levels. These features were not used in this study, but
would be useful in modeling particular scenarios where information on these characteristics is
pertinent and available (Rogstad and Pelikan 2011).

Parameters held constant across trials

Control Equilibrium Population
Those species with total population sizes of less than or equal to 5 in the entire plot, were
excluded as such low numbers were not tractable for proper experimental simulations. Tree
species were classified here as a species having at least one individual in the population with a
DBH> 10cm.

140

To ensure that the number of reproductives was constant throughout generations, we used
the Seed Collection module of NG to assess the proportion of reproductive individuals at
different time points throughout population development. The equilibrium population had
approximately 1,220 to1,270 (Near and Far gene dispersal respectively) reproductive individuals;
these numbers remaining more or less constant through 1,000 generations.

Preserve characteristics
The spatial preserve system in NG simulations is based on a Cartesian grid system where
coordinates can be specified by their x or y coordinates. The distance between two grid points in
NG represents the minimum distance between two reproductive individuals of the population.
Thus, the entire user-specified preserve area represents the carrying capacity of the population
(k). The minimum distance between two reproductive individuals was set at 5m (Eeley and
Chapman 2008).

Age-size class distribution
We used data on the abundance in every size-class reported for those species considered to be
rare in the Lambir National Forest park plot (species with population densities below 0.7,
excluding those with a total population size of less than 5 individuals) to generate an average
size-class distribution for them. We averaged the DBH growth rates (mm/year) reported for
these species to convert size-class categories into corresponding age-classes (Lee et al., 2004;
Lee et al. 2005; CTFS 2015). The age-size class categories used in the study were as follows: 0
- 2cm = 0 to 11yrs, 2 - 3cm = 11 to 16yrs, 3 - 4cm = 16 to 21yrs, 4 - 5cm = 21 to 26yrs, 5 - 10cm

141

= 26 to 53yrs, 10 - 20cm = 53 to 124yrs, 20 - 30cm = 124 to 187yrs, 30 - 60cm = 187 to 302yrs,
60 - 100cm = 302 to 456yrs.
The age-class distribution was as follows: (DBH category followed by number of
individuals in category): 1 to 2 cm DBH: 862, 2 to 3 cm DBH: 536, 3 to 4 cm DBH: 346, 4 to 5
cm DBH: 187, 5 to 10 cm DBH: 425, 10 to 20 cm DBH: 385, 20 to 30 cm DBH: 122, 30 to 60
cm DBH: 108, 60 to 100 cm DBH: 30.

Age-specific mortality
Mortality in NG can result if two individuals happen to land on the same coordinates on the
preserve, in which case one of the plants is randomly chosen to establish while the other dies.
Mortality also results when offspring are dispersed off the preserve, or when they land on a
coordinate which has been pre-designated by the user as a site where individuals can not
establish (i.e. buffer zones with 20% of the sites viable for establishment).
Studies on mortality in certain tropical trees has shown higher mortality rates for the
younger age classes comprising the seedlings and saplings, which progressively decline till
reproductive maturity is established (Metcalf et al. 2009).

The following age-specific mortality

schedule was used: Ages 0 to 10 = 0.6640, Ages 10 to 30 = 0.003, Ages 30 to 42 = 0.001, Ages
90 to 91 = 0.001, Ages 91 to 475 = 0.0001.

Age-specific offspring production
This parameter describes the expected proportion of offspring generated by individuals of each
age class from a given bout of mating that have a chance of establishment. The number of
offspring produced by each age class is distributed among eligible individuals according to the
Poisson distribution. To generate a demographic equilibrium population, the offspring
142

production rate was modified along with age-specific mortality, within realistic ranges until rates
producing equilibrium were determined, where offspring production was kept highest during
reproductive maturity. Studies on some species of tropical trees have shown seed output to be
positively associated with increases in age; Clark and Clark 1994). We used a realistic pattern of
relative offspring production as follows: Ages 52 to 75 = 2.1, Ages 76 to 123 = 2.6, Ages 124 to
474 = 4.8, Age 475 = 4.8. Offspring production rates between specified ages are interpolated
between the rates specified for the low and high age intervals.

Age-specific pollen production
The pollen production rate was meant to reflect realistic reproductive processes with the greatest
pollen production achieved during the period of full reproductive maturity and then declining
during senescence. This parameter describes the relative probability of donating pollen as a
function of age, and was set as follows: Ages 25-52=0.4, Ages 53-455=1, Ages 456-481=0.98.

Selfing rate and Inbreeding of founding population
The selfing rate and the Inbreeding coefficient (F) for the founders of the equilibrium population
was set at 0.0 as TLRF trees have been found to be predominantly outcrossed (Ashton*) and to
start simulations with a simple model of genetic history (details in Discussion).

143

Parameters that varied across trials

Offspring dispersal
Offspring dispersal distance in NG is determined by dispersal probabilities assigned to each
series of hierarchically nested distance frames that are user-specified (S2 Fig.). Distance frames
are delimited by distances in the Cartesian grid x and y direction from the offspring producing
(pistillate) individual selected in a particular mating. Plants generally have leptokurtic dispersal
curves, with the majority of offspring or seeds being dispersed closer to the maternal plant and
occasional instances of far distance dispersal (Nathan, 2008; Berens et al. 2013).
The offspring dispersal probability distribution for Near dispersal was as follows
(distances are in the x and y direction from the offspring producing individual): distances 0 to
30m = 65% probability of dispersal, 30m to 90m = 15% , 90m to 300m = 18% , 300m to 1000m
= 1.9%, and 1000m to 15000m = 0.1% probability of dispersal (S2 Fig.). The Far offspring
dispersal probability schedule was as follows: Distances 0 to 30m = 5% probability of dispersal,
30 to 90 m = 10%, 90m to 300m – 35%, 300m to 1000m = 49.9%, and 1000m to 15000m =
0.1% probability.

Pollen dispersal
The NG pollen dispersal parameter also utilizes a user-specified distance-dependent probability
nested frame schedule. When a distance frame is chosen as per this schedule for a given mating,
a pollen donor is randomly selected from within this distance frame from a pool of eligible
pollen donors as per the age-specific pollen production distribution. The same two extremes of
gene dispersal distance scenarios used for offspring dispersal, namely Near and Far, were used

144

for the pollen dispersal parameter, with the same distance dispersal probability schedules. The
Near pollen dispersal probability distribution was as follows: (Distances are in the x and y
direction relative to the offspring producing individual, and probability refers to the chance of
pollen arriving from a particular distance frame): Distances 0 to 30m = 65% probability, 30m to
90m = 15% probability, 90m to 300m = 18% probability, 300m to 1000m = 1.9%probability,
1000m to 15000m = 0.1% probability. The Far offspring dispersal probability schedule was as
follows: Distances 0 to 30m = 5% probability, 30 to 90 m = 10% probability, 90m to 300m –
35% probability, 300m to 1000m = 49.9% probability, 1000m to 15000m = 0.1% probability (S2
Fig.).

Seed Collection
Path lengths in NG are reported in grid points, which were then converted to km based on the
minimum average distance between reproductive individuals (see Preserve characteristics for
more details).
The different geometric patterns of harvesting function as follows. For the random
pattern of harvesting, SC uses a random number generator and puts all the parental plants in a
random order. Thereafter SC collects from this randomized list of plants as per the user-defined
specifications. The transect method of sampling functions as follows. Starting at the lower lefthand corner of the border of the specified sampling region, the program collects along a line
transect from this point in a straight line towards the opposite border. Parameters specifying the
perpendicular distance from the transect (x) within which sampling can occur, as well as the
diameter area around an individual where sampling is possible, can also be designated to alter
attributes of the transect. The parameters involved in the Transect collection method are as

145

follows: ‘Sizefraction’ refers to the fraction of parental individuals in the sampling region from
which seeds can be collected from, ‘Steplow’ refers to the minimum distance travelled between
two points on the transect, ‘Stephigh’ is the maximum distance that can be taken between two
points on the transect (NG selects a random distance between ‘Stephigh’ and ‘Steplow’ as the
distance travelled from point to point along the transect), and ‘Diameter’ refers to the diameter
within the collection point on the transect within which individuals can be sampled for seed.
Once the opposite border has been reached, the program selects a point along the border in
positive vertical direction a distance of x grid points away (to avoid re-sampling the same area)
and continues to sample along a belt transect towards the opposite border from this point. This
pattern continues until the specified number of individuals has been sampled and the total
number of seeds have been collected. In a case where the sampling regions are subdivided
instead of being contiguous, the program executes the transect method described above in each
of the specified sub-sampling regions in the order they are listed in the parameter file.
With regards to the nearest neighbor method, the program initially selects a random
individual in the designated sampling area to collect seeds from, and thereafter keeps harvesting
seeds from the nearest neighbor relative to the position of the last sampled individual. It collects
seeds in this fashion until all seed collection specifications have been satisfied.

Geometric pattern of collection
The parameters used for Transect were as follows: Sizefraction = 1, Steplow = 3, Stephigh = 5,
Diameter = 2 (see ‘Seed Collection’ above for details on these parameters). For all the other
strategies Sizefraction = 1, and all the other parameters were non-applicable and had a value of 0.

146

Sampling area
Preliminary testing in NG showed that sampling regions sized 4.5 km on each side (900 grid
points) were large enough to find at least 176 offspring producing individuals from which to
sample seeds, without any variance among replicates. Sampling regions smaller than this (e.g. 1
x 1 km and 2 x 2 km) were not large enough, given the low population density, to obtain at least
176 reproductive individuals to sample from. This determination of the minimum sampling area
for this target number of reproductive individuals was done to ensure there would be no variance
in the resulting data due to the unavailability of offspring producing individuals, which if included
might hinder the clear ascertainment of the effects of the variables under study on ex-situ
collections of rare tropical trees.

Results

Observed Heterozygosity

Observed heterozygosity ranged from 0.9855 to 0.9892 and were similar across different
distances of collection, gene dispersal scenarios and collection strategies. This output was not a
sensitive indicator to changes in genetic diversity brought about by different aspects of ex situ
collections as was the number of alleles preserved (Allendorf and Luikart 2007; Rogstad and
Pelikan 2011). Therefore the latter output was used as a measure of genetic diversity changes
used in the study.

147

Population subdivision and Inbreeding

Mean Fit values of the seeds collected from different types of ex situ collections did not reach
beyond 0.005 for the 1x176, 2x88, and 44x4 collection proportions, indicating very low levels of
population subdivision and/or inbreeding (Allendorf and Luikart 2007). For cases where a
greater number of seeds were sampled from a smaller group of trees (i.e. 11x16, 22x8, 44x4) Fit
values were negative suggesting an excess of heterozygotes relative to Hardy-Weinberg
expectations. This could be because the repeated collection of half-sib offspring from a single
parent or from a small group of parents (essentially sampling a small part of the population),
would induce the loss of rare alleles faster than the loss of heterozygosity (Roderick and Navajas
2003). In this case the parental alleles would increase in frequency in the offspring who would
nevertheless be heterozygous. This pattern would be more evident in cases where only a few
trees are sampled for seeds, thus the excess heterozygosity seen in the 11x16, 22x8, 44x4 ratios
of collection.

Gene dispersal scenario

This trend of greater number of alleles being preserved under Far dispersal vs. Near was also
apparent across different Sampling locations (e.g. Border, 100m In, 500m In), and different
Geometric patterns of collection, except for a few cases under the 1x176 collection proportion
where the number of alleles captured did not significantly vary between Gene dispersal

148

scenarios (Unpaired T-tests p<0.0006) except for the 1x176 ratio for Random at 500m In,
Neighbor at 500m In, Transect at the Center, and Random at the Border).

Geometric pattern of collection

The pattern of the highest number of alleles being preserved by the Random pattern of collection,
followed by the Transect and Neighbor was not as distinct in the 1x176 ratio of collection (even
though Random vs. Neighbor and Transect trials for 1x176 were statistically different for
collections made at 500m In and Center under Far dispersal), but was especially evident and
significant for most of the cases where more seeds were collected from a smaller sample of trees
(e.g. 11x16, 22x8; Fig. 3; One way ANOVAs p<0.001 Bonferroni corrected, across all Sampling
locations and Gene dispersal scenarios).

References
Allendorf FW, Luikart G (2007) Conservation and the genetics of populations. Blackwell
publishing.
Berens DG, Griebeler EM, Braun C, Chituyi BB, Nathan R, Böhning-Gaese K (2013) Changes
of effective gene dispersal distances by pollen and seeds across successive life stages in a
tropical tree. Oikos 122: 1616-1625.
Clark DA, Clark DB (1994) Climate-induced annual variation in canopy tree growth in a Costa
Rican tropical rain forest. Journal of Ecology 82: 856-872.
CTFS (2015) http://www.ctfs.si.edu/site/Lambir/census/. Smithsonian Research Institution.
Accessed 1 September 2014.
Eeley HA, Chapman CA (2008) Tree spacing and area of competitive influence do not scale with
tree size in an African rain forest. Journal of Vegetation Science. 19:729-738.

149

Lee HS, Ashton PS, Yamakura T, Tan S, Davies SJ, Itoh A, Chai EK, Okhubo T, LaFrankie JV
(2005) The 52-hectare Forest Research Plot at Lambir Hills, Sarawak, Malaysia: Tree
distribution maps, diameter tables and species documentation. Forest Department Sarawak,
Sarawak.
Lee HS, Tan S, Davies SJ, LaFrankie JV, Yamakura T, Itoh A, Okhubo T, Harrison R (2004)
Lambir Forest Dynamics Plot, Malaysia. In:Forest Diversity and Dynamism: Findings from a
large-scale plot network. Chicago University Press, Chicago, pp 527-539.
Metcalf C, Horvitz C, Tuljapurkar S, Clark D (2009) A time to grow and a time to die: a new way
to analyze the dynamics of size, light, age, and death of tropical trees. Ecology 90: 2766-2778.
Nathan R, Schurr FM, Spiegel O, Steinitz O, Trakhtenbrot A, Tsoar A (2008) Mechanisms of
long-distance seed dispersal. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23: 638-647.
Roderick GK, Navajas M (2003) Genes in new environments: Genetics and evolution in
biological control. Nature Reviews Genetics 4:889-899.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2011) Genetic diversity in establishing plant populations: Founder number
and geometry. Science Publishers, Enfield.

150

Chapter 5 - Conclusion

The research described here explored varying features of conservation methodologies for plant
species, including the determination of: 1) optimal reintroduction geometries of the American
chestnut; 2) sustainable spatial patterns of logging for fragmented tropical lowland rain forest
(TLRF) tree species that have undergone changes to their dispersal attributes; and 3) more costeffective ex situ seed collection strategies for rare TLRF tree species, with the goal of
maximizing the harvest of genetic variation from the source population with the least effort
expended. These issues were tested under alternate offspring and pollen dispersal distance
scenarios to account for possible interactive effects with reintroduction geometry, spatial patterns
of logging, or seed harvesting methods that could potentially induce differential demographic
and/or population genetic responses. Findings from these research studies suggest that spatial
considerations, gene flow distances, and ratio of seeds collected to plants sampled (for seed
collection trials), can create varying population growth and genetic diversity outcomes for
different types of target plant species and thus might be important factors to consider in the
design and implementation of conservation methodologies for such species.

Chapter 2: Reintroduction plantings of the American chestnut

It is evident from the results that varying the geometry of reintroduction plantings of the
American chestnut can influence population growth trajectories and levels of genetic diversity
retention in the reintroduced populations over the long term. These responses varied under
alternate offspring and pollen dispersal conditions, suggesting that spatial aspects of

151

reintroductions such as geometry of plantings can interact with life-history traits such as gene
dispersal to produce different demographic and population genetic outcomes. For example,
diagonal distance of founder planting relative to the preserve corner was positively correlated
with population growth and genetic diversity retention to different extents. Planting at least
100m in from the corner was sufficient to maximize genetic diversity, while the optimal distance
for maintaining population growth was 300m in from the border. These patterns were especially
clear under cases of more distant offspring dispersal which generated higher population sizes and
retained greater levels of genetic diversity through 100 generations, compared to cases of more
restricted dispersal. Collectively the results suggest that for reintroduction projects, planting and
manipulating a limited number of seeds in geometric patterns that promote population growth
and genetic diversity retention over time would be effective in conserving both genetic variation
and expensive resources (e.g. genetically engineered seeds of American chestnut; Jacobs et al.
2012). Furthermore, manual manipulations of offspring to greater distances as modeled in this
study, could potentially increase population growth and allelic diversity, thus taking advantage of
favorable interactions between planting geometry and life-history traits of the target population.
Practical implications include the existence of different management options for managers
seeking to prioritize either founder population growth or genetic diversity based on the different
costs associated with each.

Chapter 3: Deforestation in fragmented TLRF tree populations

Varying the spatial pattern of logging on isolated fragmented, long-lived canopy TLRF tree
populations that had undergone changes to their offspring and pollen dispersal kernels induced

152

different population recovery, genetic diversity retention, and population subdivision and/or
inbreeding outcomes. Most of the variation in these different output comparisons were
attributable to changes in the offspring and pollen dispersal distances, rather than spatial logging
pattern or the interaction of the two variables, with long-distance gene dispersal leading to higher
levels of population recovery and genetic diversity retention. Offspring dispersal distance was
found to be the main driver of demographic and population genetic changes relative to pollen
dispersal, suggesting that directing limited conservation resources on local offspring
establishment might lead to more favorable population growth and genetic diversity
consequences as modeled here than would directing resources to manage both mechanisms of
dispersal (Yinegar et al. 2015; Chazdon 2003).
Variations in spatial pattern of logging did not bring about large differences in population
growth and genetic diversity retention compared to gene dispersal distances. However, logging
pattern did significantly affect the population recovery and genetic diversity retention in cleared
areas under several gene dispersal scenarios, when it was performed in regions closer to the
border compared to centrally located ones. This suggests that, under certain gene dispersal
situations, positioning logging activities closer to the center of the target area can improve
population recovery and genetic diversity retention than situating post-fragmentation
deforestation closer to the border.

Chapter 4: Ex situ seed collections from rare TLRF populations

The results demonstrate the importance of factors such as ratio of seeds collected to plants
sampled, geometric pattern of collection, gene dispersal distance and sampling location in the

153

design and implementation of ex situ collection trials as variations in these caused different
amounts of genetic variation to be procured from the source population of rare TRLF tree
populations. Across short- and long-distance offspring and pollen dispersal, variations in ratio of
seeds collected and plants sampled induced the largest changes in the number of alleles captured,
with the efficiency of collection trials being optimized when fewer seeds were collected from
fewer individuals (e.g. 1 seed from each of 176 trees). Other variables were also influential in
some situations. For example, random patterns of harvesting yielded more genetic variation
from the source population, followed by collections made along a transect and then from nearest
neighbors. However, collecting from the nearest neighbors was determined to be the more costeffective strategy when sampling a low number of seeds from a large group of trees (i.e., 1 seed
from each of 176 trees) compared to a random methodology, which was more economical to use
when sampling more seeds from fewer trees (e.g. 44 seeds from each of 4 trees). Sampling in
peripheral subdivided regions relative to a contiguous central one was found to improve rare
allele capture under both short and long distance gene dispersal. However this was true only
when sampling from the nearest neighbors or along a transect (not for the random strategy),
especially when collecting more seeds from each of a few trees (higher ratios of seeds collected
to plants sampled), thus highlighting the interactive effects of sampling location, geometric
pattern of collection, and ratios of seeds collected/plants sampled. Allelic diversity procurement
was maximized under long-distance offspring and pollen dispersal compared to more restricted
gene flow, suggesting that shortening of dispersal kernels due to post-fragmentation alterations
in the behavior and abundance of offspring dispersers and pollinators could affect how much
genetic diversity is available for harvest from seed collections from fragmented forest
landscapes. The results also indicate the importance of information regarding the offspring and

154

pollen dispersal characteristics of target species (e.g., dispersal distance) for providing greater
accuracy in predictive modeling studies (Gustafsson et al. 2016; Hoban and Strand 2015).

Conclusion

The studies performed here compared restoration procedures to determine better methods to
conserve and sustain threatened tree species in temperate and lowland TLRFs, and demonstrated
that life-history traits of target species, along with other aspects of restoration such as
reintroduction geometry, spatial deforestation pattern, and ex situ sampling location, can
influence patterns of population recovery and/or genetic diversity preservation. Such predictive
modeling studies constitute useful tools that can reveal species manipulations that better sustain
population sizes and allelic variation of threatened species over time and thus lower their
extinction risk (Arroyo-Rodríguez et al. 2015). They also highlight the need for more biological
information on the life-history characteristics of target species from field studies to help make
computer modeling studies more accurate (Gustafsson et al. 2016).
Simulation modeling can also be useful in projective population development to
determine whether certain checkpoint criteria of conservation goals are being met. If not, further
modeling can assist in determining subsequent interventions (Pelikan and Rogstad 2013; Rogstad
and Pelikan 2011; Peck 2004). Hopefully, simulation programs such as NG will not only point
out major issues that need to be considered in the protective management of plant species, but
will also contribute to improving conservation outcomes.

155

References
Arroyo-Rodríguez V, Melo, FP, Martínez-Ramos M, Bongers F, Chazdon RL et al. (2015)
Multiple successional pathways in human-modified tropical landscapes: new insights from forest
succession, forest fragmentation and landscape ecology research. Biological Reviews. 2015:000000.
Brancilion PH, Melo FP, Tabarelli M, Rodrigeus RR (2013) Biodiversity persistence in highly
human-modified tropical landscapes depends on ecological restoration. Tropical Conservation
Science. 6:705-710.
Chazdon R (2008) Beyond deforestation: Restoring forests and ecosystem services on degraded
lands. Science. 320:1458-1460.
Chazdon R (2003) Tropical forest recovery: legacies of human impact and natural disturbances.
Perspectives in Plant Ecology, evolution and systematics. 6:51-71.
Gustafsson M, Gustafsson L, Alloysius D, Falck J, Yap S, Karlsson A, Ilstedt U (2016) Life
history traits predict the response to increased light among 33 tropical rainforest tree species.
Forest Ecology and Management. 362:20-28.
Jacobs DF, Dalgleish HJ, Nelson CD (2012) A conceptual framework for restoration of
threatened plants: the effective model of American chestnut (Castanea dentata) reintroduction.
New Phytologist. 197:378-393.
Hoban S, Strand A (2015) Ex situ seed collections will benefit from considering spatial sampling
design and species’ reproductive biology. Biological Conservation. 187:182-191.
Peck S (2004) Simulation as experiment: a philosophical reassessment for biological modeling.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 19:530-534.
Pelikan S, Rogstad SH (2013) NEWGARDEN: a computer program to model the population
dynamics and genetics of establishing and fragmented plant populations. Conservation Genetics
Resources 5: 857-862.
Rogstad SH, Pelikan S (2011) Genetic diversity in establishing plant populations: Founder
number and geometry. Science Publishers, Enfield.
Shoo LP, Freebody K, Kanowski J, Catterall CP (2016) Slow recovery of tropical old-field
rainforest regrowth and the value and limitations of active restoration. Conservation Biology.
30:121-132.
Sork VL (2015) Gene flow and natural selection shape spatial patterns of genes in tree
populations: implications for evolutionary processes and applications. Evolutionary
Applications. 9:291-310.

156

Turner GT, Anderson S, Gonzales-Chang M, Costanza R, Courville S et al. (2016) A review of
methods, data, and models to assess changes in the value of ecosystem services from land
degradation and restoration. Ecological Modelling. 319:190-207.
Yinegar H, Schmidt DJ, Teketay D, Zalucki J, Hughes JM (2015) Gene dispersal inference across
forest patches in an endangered medicinal tree: comparison of model-based approaches. Biological
Journal of the Linnaean Society. 114:887-904.
Zanella C, Bruxel M, Paggi G, Goetze M, Buttow M, Cidade F, Bered F (2011) Genetic structure
and phenotypic variation in wild populations of the medicinal tetraploid species Bromelia
antiacantha (Bromeliaceae). American Journal of Botany. 98:1511-1519.

157

S3 Appendix - Example NEWGARDEN Input parameter files
Chapter 2 – (Conditions: Basic dispersal conditions, square of founders placed at the
Corner)
<Simulation_Data>
<LOCI number_loci="0" auto_alleles_per_locus="100"
number_automatic_loci="30">
</LOCI>
<Dioecious value="false"/>
<Reproduction_Rate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="1" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="2" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="7" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="8" y="0.02"/>
<functionpoint x="10" y="0.04"/>
<functionpoint x="12" y="0.08"/>
<functionpoint x="17" y="0.2"/>
<functionpoint x="70" y="1.3"/>
<functionpoint x="320" y="1.3"/>
<functionpoint x="400" y="0.2"/>
<functionpoint x="600" y="0.01"/>
</Reproduction_Rate>
<Offspring_Distribution method="poisson"/>
<Pollen_Rate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="1" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="5" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="6" y="0.2"/>
<functionpoint x="10" y="0.5"/>
<functionpoint x="25" y="0.95"/>
<functionpoint x="75" y="1.2"/>
<functionpoint x="400" y="0.85"/>
<functionpoint x="600" y="0"/>
</Pollen_Rate>
<Mortality_Rate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0.3"/>
<functionpoint x="1" y="0.2"/>
<functionpoint x="4" y="0.1"/>
<functionpoint x="7" y="0.05"/>
<functionpoint x="10" y="0.02"/>
<functionpoint x="400" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="600" y="1"/>
158

</Mortality_Rate>
<Selfing_Rate value="0.0"/>
<RandomMating value="false"/>
<Dispersal_Distribution>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="6" y="0.25"/>
<functionpoint x="13" y="0.5"/>
<functionpoint x="22" y="0.75"/>
<functionpoint x="301" y="1"/>
</Dispersal_Distribution>
<EasyPollen>
<pollenframe low="0" high="5" prob="0.25"/>
<pollenframe low="6" high="12" prob="0.25"/>
<pollenframe low="13" high="21" prob="0.25"/>
<pollenframe low="22" high="300" prob="0.25"/>
<pollenframe low="301" high="Inf" prob="0"/>
</EasyPollen>
<Region XL="-506" XH="493" YL="-506" YH="493">
</Region>
<SummaryRegions>
</SummaryRegions>
<Number_Generations value="101"/>
<Number_Runs value="30"/>
<Initial_Population>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "0"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "2"/>
159

<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "2"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "4"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "6"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "8"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "8"/>
160

<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "10"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "12"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "14"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "16"/>
161

<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "16"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "18"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "20"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "22"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="0" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="2" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="4" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="6" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="8" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="10" Y = "24"/>
162

<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="12" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="14" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="16" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="18" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="20" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="true" X="22" Y = "24"/>
<Plant age ="13" femaleP ="false" X="24" Y = "24"/>
</Initial_Population>
<FoundersF value="0.0"/>
</Simulation_Data>

Chapter 3 – (Conditions: 4Squares, Near gene dispersal)
This file is to work with/test out/document
NewGarden version 2.5 (21 Jan 2012)
It includes 2012 imrpovements; especially implementation
of a seedbank.
-->
<Simulation_Data>
<LOCI number_loci="0" auto_alleles_per_locus="100"
number_automatic_loci="30">
</LOCI>
<Dioecious value="false"/>
<Reproduction_Rate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="139" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="140" y="0.5"/>
<functionpoint x="168" y="2.5"/>
<functionpoint x="196" y="7.8"/>
<functionpoint x="216" y="7.8"/>
<functionpoint x="236" y="8"/>
<functionpoint x="268" y="8"/>
<functionpoint x="295" y="8"/>
<functionpoint x="396" y="8"/>
<functionpoint x="425" y="6"/>
<functionpoint x="426" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="5000" y="0"/>
</Reproduction_Rate>
-->
<Offspring_Distribution method="poisson"/>
<SeedProductionRate>
163

<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="425" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="500" y="0"/>
</SeedProductionRate>
<SeedDistribution method="poisson"/>
<SeedBankMixInRate value="0"/>
<Pollen_Rate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="139" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="140" y="0.10"/>
<functionpoint x="196" y="0.20"/>
<functionpoint x="236" y="1.00"/>
<functionpoint x="295" y="1.00"/>
<functionpoint x="365" y="1.00"/>
<functionpoint x="396" y="1.00"/>
<functionpoint x="425" y="0.75"/>
<functionpoint x="426" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="5000" y="0"/>
</Pollen_Rate>
<Mortality_Rate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0.25"/>
<functionpoint x="6" y="0.25"/>
<functionpoint x="11" y="0.14"/>
<functionpoint x="26" y="0.0075"/>
<functionpoint x="51" y="0.0085"/>
<functionpoint x="76" y="0.0095"/>
<functionpoint x="101" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="151" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="201" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="251" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="301" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="401" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="425" y="0.01"/>
<functionpoint x="426" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="5000" y="0"/>
</Mortality_Rate>
<SeedMortalityRate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="425" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="500" y="0"/>
</SeedMortalityRate>
<Selfing_Rate value="0.098"/>
<RandomMating value="true"/>
164

<Dispersal_Distribution>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="32" y="0.80"/>
<functionpoint x="64" y="0.85"/>
<functionpoint x="96" y="0.90"/>
<functionpoint x="128" y="0.95"/>
<functionpoint x="161" y="1.00"/>
</Dispersal_Distribution>
<EasyPollen>
<pollenframe low="0" high="31" prob="0.80"/>
<pollenframe low="32" high="63" prob="0.05"/>
<pollenframe low="64" high="95" prob="0.05"/>
<pollenframe low="96" high="127" prob="0.05"/>
<pollenframe low="128" high="160" prob="0.05"/>
</EasyPollen>
<Region XL="0" XH="159" YH="159" YL="0">
<Rectangle XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27"/>
<Rectangle XL="0" XH="27" YL="28" YH="131"/>
<Rectangle XL="28" XH="52" YL="28" YH="52"/>
<Rectangle XL="53" XH="105" YL="28" YH="52"/>
<Rectangle XL="106" XH="131" YL="28" YH="52"/>
<Rectangle XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131"/>
<Rectangle XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106"/>
<Rectangle XL="28" XH="53" YL="107" YH="131"/>
<Rectangle XL="54" XH="106" YL="107" YH="131"/>
<Rectangle XL="107" XH="131" YL="107" YH="131"/>
<Rectangle XL="0" XH="159" YL="132" YH="159"/>
</Region>
<SummaryRegions>
<Region XL="0" XH="159" YH="159" YL="0">
<Rectangle XL="28" XH="52" YL="28" YH="52"/>
</Region>
<Region XL="0" XH="159" YH="159" YL="0">
<Rectangle XL="106" XH="131" YL="28" YH="52"/>
</Region>
<Region XL="0" XH="159" YH="159" YL="0">
<Rectangle XL="107" XH="131" YL="107" YH="131"/>
</Region>
<Region XL="0" XH="159" YH="159" YL="0">
<Rectangle XL="28" XH="53" YL="107" YH="131"/>
</Region>
<Region XL="0" XH="159" YH="159" YL="0">
<Rectangle XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27"/>
<Rectangle XL="0" XH="27" YL="28" YH="131"/>
165

<Rectangle XL="53" XH="105" YL="28" YH="52"/>
<Rectangle XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131"/>
<Rectangle XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106"/>
<Rectangle XL="54" XH="106" YL="107" YH="131"/>
<Rectangle XL="0" XH="159" YL="132" YH="159"/>
</Region>
</SummaryRegions>

<Number_Generations value="465"/>
<Number_Runs value="100"/>
<DataInterval value="1"/>
<Initial_Population>
<RandomPlantList number="49" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="0" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="32" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="0" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="15" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="53" XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="0" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="32" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="0" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="61" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="0" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="14" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="54" XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="0" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="49" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="0" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="32" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="21" agehi="40"/>
<RandomPlantList number="21" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="21" agehi="40"/>
<RandomPlantList number="9" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="21" agehi="40"/>
<RandomPlantList number="21" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="21" agehi="40"/>
<RandomPlantList number="40" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="21" agehi="40"/>
<RandomPlantList number="9" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="21" agehi="40"/>
<RandomPlantList number="32" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="21" agehi="40"/>
<RandomPlantList number="18" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
166

XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="41" agehi="60"/>
<RandomPlantList number="12" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="41" agehi="60"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="41" agehi="60"/>
<RandomPlantList number="12" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="41" agehi="60"/>
<RandomPlantList number="22" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="41" agehi="60"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="41" agehi="60"/>
<RandomPlantList number="18" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="41" agehi="60"/>
<RandomPlantList number="9" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="61" agehi="80"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="61" agehi="80"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="61" agehi="80"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="61" agehi="80"/>
<RandomPlantList number="12" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="61" agehi="80"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="61" agehi="80"/>
<RandomPlantList number="10" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="61" agehi="80"/>
<RandomPlantList number="9" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="81" agehi="100"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="81" agehi="100"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="81" agehi="100"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="81" agehi="100"/>
<RandomPlantList number="11" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="81" agehi="100"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="81" agehi="100"/>
<RandomPlantList number="9" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="81" agehi="100"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="101" agehi="108"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="101" agehi="108"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="101" agehi="108"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="101" agehi="108"/>
167

<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="101" agehi="108"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="101" agehi="108"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="101" agehi="108"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="109" agehi="116"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="109" agehi="116"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="109" agehi="116"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="109" agehi="116"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="109" agehi="116"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="109" agehi="116"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="109" agehi="116"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="117" agehi="124"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="117" agehi="124"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="117" agehi="124"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="117" agehi="124"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="117" agehi="124"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="117" agehi="124"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="117" agehi="124"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="125" agehi="132"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="125" agehi="132"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="125" agehi="132"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="125" agehi="132"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="125" agehi="132"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="125" agehi="132"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="125" agehi="132"/>
168

<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="133" agehi="140"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="133" agehi="140"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="133" agehi="140"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="133" agehi="140"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="133" agehi="140"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="133" agehi="140"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="133" agehi="140"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="141" agehi="168"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="141" agehi="168"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="141" agehi="168"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="141" agehi="168"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="141" agehi="168"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="141" agehi="168"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="141" agehi="168"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="169" agehi="196"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="169" agehi="196"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="169" agehi="196"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="169" agehi="196"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="169" agehi="196"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="169" agehi="196"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="169" agehi="196"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="197" agehi="216"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="197" agehi="216"/>
169

<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="197" agehi="216"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="197" agehi="216"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="197" agehi="216"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="197" agehi="216"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="197" agehi="216"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="217" agehi="236"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="217" agehi="236"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="217" agehi="236"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="217" agehi="236"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="217" agehi="236"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="217" agehi="236"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="217" agehi="236"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="237" agehi="252"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="237" agehi="252"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="237" agehi="252"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="237" agehi="252"/>
<RandomPlantList number="6" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="237" agehi="252"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="237" agehi="252"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="237" agehi="252"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="253" agehi="268"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="253" agehi="268"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="253" agehi="268"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="253" agehi="268"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="253" agehi="268"/>
170

<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="253" agehi="268"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="253" agehi="268"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="269" agehi="282"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="269" agehi="282"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="269" agehi="282"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="269" agehi="282"/>
<RandomPlantList number="5" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="269" agehi="282"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="269" agehi="282"/>
<RandomPlantList number="4" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="269" agehi="282"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="283" agehi="295"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="283" agehi="295"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="283" agehi="295"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="283" agehi="295"/>
<RandomPlantList number="3" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="283" agehi="295"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="283" agehi="295"/>
<RandomPlantList number="2" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="283" agehi="295"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="296" agehi="309"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="296" agehi="309"/>
<RandomPlantList number="0" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="296" agehi="309"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="296" agehi="309"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="296" agehi="309"/>
<RandomPlantList number="0" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="296" agehi="309"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="296" agehi="309"/>
171

<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="310" agehi="323"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="27" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="310" agehi="323"/>
<RandomPlantList number="0" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="53"
XH="105" YL="28" YH="52" agelow="310" agehi="323"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="132" XH="159" YL="28" YH="131" agelow="310" agehi="323"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="28"
XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="310" agehi="323"/>
<RandomPlantList number="0" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="54"
XH="106" YL="107" YH="131" agelow="310" agehi="323"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="310" agehi="323"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="0" YH="27" agelow="324" agehi="337"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0" XH="159" YL="132" YH="159" agelow="352" agehi="365"/>
<RandomPlantList number="1" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="28" XH="131" YL="53" YH="106" agelow="413" agehi="425"/>
</Initial_Population>
<FoundersF value="0.0"/>
</Simulation_Data>

Chapter 4 – (Conditions: Border, Near gene dispersal)
This file is to work with/test out/document
X NewGarden version 2.73 (30 June 2014)
X NewGarden version 2.74 (7 July 2014)
-> NewGarden version 2.75 (7 Sept 2014)
NOTE older SimData.xml files may not work with this version of
NEWGARDEN and older versions of NewGarden may not work with this
format of parameter file.
<Simulation_Data>
<LOCI number_loci="20" number_automatic_loci="20"
auto_alleles_per_locus="100">
</LOCI>
<InbreedingDepression
use="false"
depressionloci="10,11,12,13"
172

depression_reproduction="false"
depression_mortality="false"
>
<IBD_ReproductionEffect x="0,0.5,1" y="1,0.8,0.5"/>
</InbreedingDepression>
<Dioecious value="false"/>
<Reproduction_Rate>
<functionpoint x="10" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="15" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="20" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="28" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="52" y="2.1"/>
<functionpoint x="76" y="2.6"/>
<functionpoint x="124" y="2.9"/>
<functionpoint x="193" y="4.8"/>
<functionpoint x="194" y="4.8"/>
<functionpoint x="336" y="5.8"/>
<functionpoint x="476" y="5.8"/>
</Reproduction_Rate>
<Offspring_Distribution method="poisson"/>
<SeedGerminationRate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="1"/>
<functionpoint x="1" y="0"/>
</SeedGerminationRate>
<Pollen_Rate>
<functionpoint x="20" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="25" y="0.4"/>
<functionpoint x="52" y="1"/>
<functionpoint x="301" y="1"/>
<functionpoint x="455" y="0.89"/>
</Pollen_Rate>
<Mortality_Rate>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0.6640"/>
<functionpoint x="10" y="0.30"/>
<functionpoint x="30" y="0.003"/>
<functionpoint x="42" y="0.001"/>
<functionpoint x="90" y="0.001"/>
<functionpoint x="91" y="0.0001"/>
<functionpoint x="200" y="0.0001"/>
<functionpoint x="400" y="0.0001"/>
</Mortality_Rate>
<SeedMortalityRate>
<functionpoint x="0"
<functionpoint x="1"
</SeedMortalityRate>

y="1"/>
y="1"/>
173

<Selfing_Rate value="0.0"/>
<RandomMating value="false"/>
<Dispersal_Distribution>
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="7" y="0.65"/>
<functionpoint x="19" y="0.80"/>
<functionpoint x="61" y="0.98"/>
<functionpoint x="201" y="0.999"/>
<functionpoint x="3001" y="1.0"/>
</Dispersal_Distribution>
<DispersalDirection use="false">
<functionpoint x="0" y="0"/>
<functionpoint x="360" y="1"/>
</DispersalDirection>
<EasyPollen>
<pollenframe low="0" high ="6" prob="0.65"/>
<pollenframe low="7" high ="18" prob="0.15"/>
<pollenframe low="19" high ="60" prob="0.18"/>
<pollenframe low="61" high ="200" prob="0.019"/>
<pollenframe low="201" high ="3000" prob="0.001"/>
</EasyPollen>
<PollenDirection use="false">
<functionpoint x="0" y="0.5"/>
<functionpoint x="90" y="0.25"/>
<functionpoint x="180" y="0.5"/>
<functionpoint x="270" y="1"/>
<functionpoint x="360" y="0.5"/>
</PollenDirection>
<Compatibility value="false" compatibility_fraction="1.0"
locus="10"/>
<NewRegion XL="-1000" XH="2999" YH="2999" YL="-1000">
<NewRectangle XL="0" YL="0" XH="1999" YH="1999" type="PLAIN"/>
<NewRectangle XL="-500" YL="-500" XH="-1" YH="2499"
type="RANDOM" density="0.2"/>
<NewRectangle XL="2000" YL="-500" XH="2499" YH="2499"
type="RANDOM" density="0.2"/>
<NewRectangle XL="0" YL="-500" XH="1999" YH="-1"
type="RANDOM" density="0.2"/>
<NewRectangle XL="0" YL="2000" XH="1999" YH="2499"
type="RANDOM" density="0.2"/>

174

<NewRectangle XL="-1000" YL="-1000" XH="-501" YH="2999"
type="RANDOM" density="0.05"/>
<NewRectangle XL="2500" YL="-1000" XH="2999" YH="2999"
type="RANDOM" density="0.05"/>
<NewRectangle XL="-500" YL="-1000" XH="2499" YH="-501"
type="RANDOM" density="0.05"/>
<NewRectangle XL="-500" YL="2500" XH="2499" YH="2999"
type="RANDOM" density="0.05"/>
</NewRegion>
<SummaryRegions>
<Region XL="0" XH="1999" YH="1999" YL="0">
<Rectangle XL="0" YL="1550" XH="449" YH="1999"/>
<Rectangle XL="1550" YL="1550" XH="1999" YH="1999"/>
<Rectangle XL="1550" YL="0" XH="1999" YH="449"/>
<Rectangle XL="0" YL="0" XH="449" YH="449"/>
</Region>
</SummaryRegions>
<MakeMaps use="false" pixelsPerSite="3">
<Vector name="maps" length="3" values="0,2,4"/>
</MakeMaps>
<Immigration use="false" rate="10" pfemale="0.55">
<Vector name="x" length="3" values="0,50,100"/>
<Vector name="y" length="3" values="0,50,100"/>
<Vector name="f" length="9" values="1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9"/>
</Immigration>
<Number_Generations value="481"/>
<Number_Runs value="30"/>
<DataInterval value="20"/>
<SeedCollection
use="true"
subregions_only="true"
seed_dump_file_name="seed481r800fourSUborder900.csv"
last_r="800"
/>
<Initial_Population>
<RandomPlantList number="862" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="0" agehi="10"/>
175

<RandomPlantList number="536" numberfemale="-1"
probfemale="0.5" XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="11" agehi="15"/>
<RandomPlantList number="346" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="16" agehi="20"/>
<RandomPlantList number="187" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="21" agehi="25"/>
<RandomPlantList number="425" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="26" agehi="52"/>
<RandomPlantList number="385" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="53" agehi="123"/>
<RandomPlantList number="122" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="124" agehi="186"/>
<RandomPlantList number="108" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="187" agehi="301"/>
<RandomPlantList number="30" numberfemale="-1" probfemale="0.5"
XL="0"
XH="1999" YL="0" YH="1999" agelow="302" agehi="455"/>
</Initial_Population>
<CreateAllFounders value="false"/>
<FoundersF value="0.0"/>
</Simulation_Data>

176

